The Project Gutenberg EBook of Savrola, by Winston Spencer Churchill

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Savrola
       A Tale of the Revolution in Laurania

Author: Winston Spencer Churchill

Release Date: January 24, 2016 [EBook #50906]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAVROLA ***




Produced by Al Haines








  SAVROLA

  A TALE OF THE REVOLUTION IN LAURANIA



  BY

  WINSTON SPENCER CHURCHILL

  AUTHOR OF "THE RIVER WAR: AN ACCOUNT OF THE RECOVERY
  OF THE SOUDAN" AND "THE STORY OF THE MALAKAND
  FIELD FORCE"



  LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
  91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK
  LONDON AND BOMBAY
  1900




  COPYRIGHT, 1899, BY
  LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED



  TYPOGRAPHY BY J. B. CUSHING & CO., NORWOOD, MASS.




  THIS BOOK IS INSCRIBED
  TO
  THE OFFICERS
  OF THE
  IVTH (QUEEN'S OWN) HUSSARS
  IN WHOSE COMPANY THE AUTHOR LIVED
  FOR FOUR HAPPY YEARS




PREFATORY NOTE

This story was written in 1897, and has already appeared in serial form
in _Macmillan's Magazine_.  Since its first reception was not
unfriendly, I resolved to publish it as a book, and I now submit it
with considerable trepidation to the judgment or clemency of the public.

WINSTON S. CHURCHILL.




  CONTENTS

  I.  An Event of Political Importance
  II.  The Head of the State
  III.  The Man of the Multitude
  IV.  The Deputation
  V.  A Private Conversation
  VI.  On Constitutional Grounds
  VII.  The State Ball
  VIII.  "In the Starlight"
  IX.  The Admiral
  X.  The Wand of the Magician
  XI.  In the Watches of the Night
  XII.  A Council of War
  XIII.  The Action of the Executive
  XIV.  The Loyalty of the Army
  XV.  Surprises
  XVI.  The Progress of the Revolt
  XVII.  The Defence of the Palace
  XVIII.  From a Window
  XIX.  An Educational Experience
  XX.  The End of the Quarrel
  XXI.  The Return of the Fleet
  XXII.  Life's Compensations




CHAPTER I.

AN EVENT OF POLITICAL IMPORTANCE.

There had been a heavy shower of rain, but the sun was already shining
through the breaks in the clouds and throwing swiftly changing shadows
on the streets, the houses, and the gardens of the city of Laurania.
Everything shone wetly in the sunlight: the dust had been laid; the air
was cool; the trees looked green and grateful.  It was the first rain
after the summer heats, and it marked the beginning of that delightful
autumn climate which has made the Lauranian capital the home of the
artist, the invalid, and the sybarite.

The shower had been heavy, but it had not dispersed the crowds that
were gathered in the great square in front of the Parliament House.  It
was welcome, but it had not altered their anxious and angry looks; it
had drenched them without cooling their excitement.  Evidently an event
of consequence was taking place.  The fine building, where the
representatives of the people were wont to meet, wore an aspect of
sombre importance that the trophies and statues, with which an ancient
and an art-loving people had decorated its façade, did not dispel.  A
squadron of Lancers of the Republican Guard was drawn up at the foot of
the great steps, and a considerable body of infantry kept a broad space
clear in front of the entrance.  Behind the soldiers the people filled
in the rest of the picture.  They swarmed in the square and the streets
leading to it; they had scrambled on to the numerous monuments, which
the taste and pride of the Republic had raised to the memory of her
ancient heroes, covering them so completely that they looked like
mounds of human beings; even the trees contained their occupants, while
the windows and often the roofs, of the houses and offices which
overlooked the scene were crowded with spectators.  It was a great
multitude and it vibrated with excitement.  Wild passions surged across
the throng, as squalls sweep across a stormy sea.  Here and there a
man, mounting above his fellows, would harangue those whom his voice
could reach, and a cheer or a shout was caught up by thousands who had
never heard the words but were searching for something to give
expression to their feelings.

It was a great day in the history of Laurania.  For five long years
since the Civil War the people had endured the insult of autocratic
rule.  The fact that the Government was strong, and the memory of the
disorders of the past, had operated powerfully on the minds of the more
sober citizens.  But from the first there had been murmurs.  There were
many who had borne arms on the losing side in the long struggle that
had ended in the victory of President Antonio Molara.  Some had
suffered wounds or confiscation; others had undergone imprisonment;
many had lost friends and relations, who with their latest breath had
enjoined the uncompromising prosecution of the war.  The Government had
started with implacable enemies, and their rule had been harsh and
tyrannical.  The ancient constitution to which the citizens were so
strongly attached and of which they were so proud, had been subverted.
The President, alleging the prevalence of sedition, had declined to
invite the people to send their representatives to that chamber which
had for many centuries been regarded as the surest bulwark of popular
liberties.  Thus the discontents increased day by day and year by year:
the National party, which had at first consisted only of a few
survivors of the beaten side, had swelled into the most numerous and
powerful faction in the State; and at last they had found a leader.
The agitation proceeded on all sides.  The large and turbulent
population of the capital were thoroughly devoted to the rising cause.
Demonstration had followed demonstration; riot had succeeded riot; even
the army showed signs of unrest.  At length the President had decided
to make concessions.  It was announced that on the first of September
the electoral writs should be issued and the people should be accorded
an opportunity of expressing their wishes and opinions.

This pledge had contented the more peaceable citizens.  The extremists,
finding themselves in a minority, had altered their tone.  The
Government, taking advantage of the favourable moment, had arrested
several of the more violent leaders.  Others, who had fought in the war
and had returned from exile to take part in the revolt, fled for their
lives across the border.  A rigorous search for arms had resulted in
important captures.  European nations, watching with interested and
anxious eyes the political barometer, were convinced that the
Government cause was in the ascendant.  But meanwhile the people
waited, silent and expectant, for the fulfilment of the promise.

At length the day had come.  The necessary preparations for summoning
the seventy thousand male electors to record their votes had been
carried out by the public officials.  The President, as the custom
prescribed, was in person to sign the necessary writ of summons to the
faithful citizens.  Warrants for election would be forwarded to the
various electoral divisions in the city and the provinces, and those
who were by the ancient law entitled to the franchise would give their
verdict on the conduct of him whom the Populists in bitter hatred had
called the Dictator.

It was for this moment that the crowd was waiting.  Though cheers from
time to time arose, they waited for the most part in silence.  Even
when the President had passed on his way to the Senate, they had
foreborne to hoot; in their eyes he was virtually abdicating, and that
made amends for all.  The time-honoured observances, the long-loved
rights would be restored, and once more democratic government would be
triumphant in Laurania.

Suddenly, at the top of the steps in the full view of the people, a
young man appeared, his dress disordered and his face crimson with
excitement.  It was Moret, one of the Civic Council.  He was
immediately recognised by the populace, and a great cheer arose.  Many
who could not see him took up the shout, which re-echoed through the
square, the expression of a nation's satisfaction.  He gesticulated
vehemently, but his words, if he spoke at all, were lost in the tumult.
Another man, an usher, followed him out hurriedly, put his hand on his
shoulder, appeared to speak with earnestness, and drew him back into
the shadow of the entrance.  The crowd still cheered.

A third figure issued from the door, an old man in the robes of
municipal office.  He walked, or rather tottered feebly down the steps
to a carriage, which had drawn up to meet him.  Again there were
cheers.  "Godoy!  Godoy!  Bravo, Godoy!  Champion of the People!
Hurrah, hurrah!"

It was the Mayor, one of the strongest and most reputable members of
the party of Reform.  He entered his carriage and drove through the
open space, maintained by the soldiery, into the crowd, which, still
cheering, gave way with respect.

The carriage was open and it was evident that the old man was painfully
moved.  His face was pale, his mouth puckered into an expression of
grief and anger, his whole frame shaken with suppressed emotion.  The
crowd had greeted him with applause, but, quick to notice, were struck
by his altered appearance and woeful looks.  They crowded round the
carriage crying: "What has happened?  Is all well?  Speak, Godoy,
speak!"  But he would have none of them, and quivering with agitation
bade his coachman drive the faster.  The people gave way slowly,
sullenly, thoughtfully, as men who make momentous resolutions.
Something had happened, untoward, unforeseen, unwelcome; what this was,
they were anxious to know.

And then began a period of wild rumour.  The President had refused to
sign the writs; he had committed suicide; the troops had been ordered
to fire; the elections would not take place, after all; Savrola had
been arrested,--seized in the very Senate, said one, murdered added
another.  The noise of the multitude changed into a dull dissonant hum
of rising anger.

At last the answer came.  There was a house, overlooking the square,
which was separated from the Chamber of Representatives only by a
narrow street, and this street had been kept clear for traffic by the
troops.  On the balcony of this house the young man, Moret, the Civic
Councillor, now reappeared, and his coming was the signal for a storm
of wild, anxious cries from the vast concourse.  He held up his hand
for silence and after some moments his words became audible to those
nearest.  "You are betrayed--a cruel fraud--the hopes we had cherished
are dashed to the ground--all has been done in vain--  Cheated!
cheated! cheated!"  The broken fragments of his oratory reached far
into the mass of excited humanity, and then he shouted a sentence,
which was heard by thousands and repeated by thousands more.  "The
register of citizenship has been mutilated, and the names of more than
half the electors have been erased.  To your tents, oh people of
Laurania!"

For an instant there was silence, and then a great sob of fury, of
disappointment, and of resolve arose from the multitude.

At this moment the presidential carriage, with its four horses, its
postilions in the Republican livery, and an escort of Lancers, moved
forward to the foot of the steps, as there emerged from the Parliament
House a remarkable figure.  He wore the splendid blue and white uniform
of a general of the Lauranian Army; his breast glittered with medals
and orders; his keen strong features were composed.  He paused for a
moment before descending to his carriage, as if to give the mob an
opportunity to hiss and hoot to their content, and appeared to talk
unconcernedly with his companion, Señor Louvet, the Minister of the
Interior.  He pointed once or twice towards the surging masses, and
then walked slowly down the steps.  Louvet had intended to accompany
him, but he heard the roar of the crowd and remembered that he had some
business to attend to in the Senate that could not be delayed; the
other went on alone.  The soldiers presented arms.  A howl of fury
arose from the people.  A mounted officer, who sat his horse unmoved,
an inexorable machine, turned to a subordinate with an order.  Several
companies of foot-soldiers began defiling from the side street on the
right of the Chamber, and drawing up in line in the open space which
was now partly invaded by the mob.

The President entered his carriage which, preceded by an entire troop
of Lancers, immediately started at a trot.  So soon as the carriage
reached the edge of the open space, a rush was made by the crowd.  The
escort closed up; "Fall back there!" shouted an officer, but he was
unheeded.  "Will you move, or must we move you?" said a gruffer voice.
Yet the mob gave not an inch.  The danger was imminent.  "Cheat!
Traitor!  Liar!  Tyrant!" they shouted, with many other expressions too
coarse to be recorded.  "Give us back our rights--you, who have stolen
them!"

And then some one at the back of the crowd fired a revolver into the
air.  The effect was electrical.  The Lancers dropped their points and
sprang forward.  Shouts of terror and fury arose on all sides.  The
populace fled before the cavalry; some fell on the ground and were
trampled to death; some were knocked down and injured by the horses; a
few were speared by the soldiers.  It was a horrible scene.  Those
behind threw stones, and some fired random pistol shots.  The President
remained unmoved.  Erect and unflinching he gazed on the tumult as men
gaze at a race about which they have not betted.  His hat was knocked
off, and a trickle of blood down his cheek showed where a stone had
struck.  For some moments the issue seemed doubtful.  The crowd might
storm the carriage and then,--to be torn to pieces by a rabble!  There
were other and more pleasant deaths.  But the discipline of the troops
overcame all obstacles, the bearing of the man appeared to cow his
enemies, and the crowd fell back, still hooting and shouting.

Meanwhile the officer commanding the infantry by the Parliament House
had been alarmed by the rushes of the mob, which he could see were
directed at the President's carriage.  He determined to create a
diversion.  "We shall have to fire on them," he said to the Major who
was beside him.

"Excellent," replied that officer; "it will enable us to conclude those
experiments in penetration, which we have been trying with the
soft-nosed bullet.  A very valuable experiment, Sir," and then turning
to the soldiers he issued several orders.  "A very valuable
experiment," he repeated.

"Somewhat expensive," said the Colonel dryly; "and half a company will
be enough, Major."

There was a rattle of breech-blocks as the rifles were loaded.  The
people immediately in front of the troops struggled madly to escape the
impending volley.  One man, a man in a straw hat, kept his head.  He
rushed forward.  "For God's sake don't fire!" he cried.  "Have mercy!
We will disperse."

There was a moment's pause, a sharp order and a loud explosion,
followed by screams.  The man in the straw hat bent backwards and fell
on the ground; other figures also subsided and lay still in curiously
twisted postures.  Every one else except the soldiers fled; fortunately
there were many exits to the square, and in a few minutes it was almost
deserted.  The President's carriage made its way through the flying
crowd to the gates of the palace, which were guarded by more soldiers,
and passed through in safety.

All was now over.  The spirit of the mob was broken and the wide
expanse of Constitution Square was soon nearly empty.  Forty bodies and
some expended cartridges lay on the ground.  Both had played their part
in the history of human developement and passed out of the
considerations of living men.  Nevertheless the soldiers picked up the
empty cases, and presently some police came with carts and took the
other things away, and all was quiet again in Laurania.




CHAPTER II.

THE HEAD OF THE STATE.

The carriage and its escort passed the ancient gateway and driving
through a wide courtyard drew up at the entrance of the palace.  The
President alighted.  He fully appreciated the importance of retaining
the good will and support of the army, and immediately walked up to the
officer who commanded the Lancers.  "None of your men hurt, I trust,"
he said.

"Nothing serious, General," replied the subaltern.

"You handled your troop with great judgment and courage.  It shall be
remembered.  But it is easy to lead brave men; they shall not be
forgotten.  Ah, Colonel, you are quite right to come to me.  I
anticipated some trouble with the disaffected classes, so soon as it
became known that we were still determined to maintain law and order in
the State."  These last words were spoken to a dark, bronzed man who
had hurriedly entered the courtyard by a side gate.  Colonel Sorrento,
for such was the newcomer's name, was the military chief of the Police.
Besides filling this important office, he discharged the duties of
War-Minister to the Republic.  The combination enabled the civil power
to be supplemented by the military with great and convenient
promptitude, whenever it was necessary or desirable to take strong
measures.  The arrangement was well suited to the times.  Usually
Sorrento was calm and serene.  He had seen many engagements and much
war of the type which knows no quarter, had been several times wounded,
and was regarded as a brave and callous man.  But there is something
appalling in the concentrated fury of a mob, and the Colonel's manner
betrayed the fact that he was not quite proof against it.

"Are you wounded, Sir?" he asked, catching sight of the President's
face.

"It is nothing,--a stone; but they were very violent.  Some one had
roused them; I had hoped to get away before the news was known.  Who
was it spoke to them?"

"Moret, the Civic Councillor, from the balcony of the hotel.  A very
dangerous man!  He told them they were betrayed."

"Betrayed?  What audacity!  Surely such language would come within the
20th Section of the Constitution: _Inciting to violence against the
person of the Head of the State by misrepresentation or otherwise_."
The President was well versed in those clauses of the public law which
were intended to strengthen the hands of the Executive.  "Have him
arrested, Sorrento.  We cannot allow the majesty of Government to be
insulted with impunity,--or stay, perhaps it would be wiser to be
magnanimous now that the matter is settled.  I do not want a State
prosecution just at present."  Then he added in a louder voice: "This
young officer, Colonel, discharged his duty with great
determination,--a most excellent soldier.  Please see that a note is
made of it.  Promotion should always go by merit, not by age, for
services and not for service.  We will not forget your behaviour, young
man."

He ascended the steps and entered the hall of the palace, leaving the
subaltern, a boy of twenty-two, flushed with pleasure and excitement,
to build high hopes of future command and success.

The hall was spacious and well-proportioned.  It was decorated in the
purest style of the Lauranian Republic, the arms of which were
everywhere displayed.  The pillars were of ancient marble and by their
size and colour attested the wealth and magnificence of former days.
The tessellated pavement presented a pleasing pattern.  Elaborate
mosaics on the walls depicted scenes from the national history: the
foundation of the city; the peace of 1370; the reception of the envoys
of the Great Mogul: the victory of Brota; the death of Saldanho, that
austere patriot, who died rather than submit to a technical violation
of the Constitution.  And then coming down to later years, the walls
showed the building of the Parliament House: the naval victory of Cape
Cheronta, and finally the conclusion of the Civil War in 1883.  On
either side of the hall, in a deep alcove, a bronze fountain, playing
amid surrounding palms and ferns, imparted a feeling of refreshing
coolness to the eye and ear.  Facing the entrance was a broad
staircase, leading to the state rooms whose doors were concealed by
crimson curtains.

A woman stood at the top of the stairs.  Her hands rested on the marble
balustrade; her white dress contrasted with the bright-coloured
curtains behind her.  She was very beautiful, but her face wore an
expression of alarm and anxiety.  Woman-like she asked three questions
at once.  "What has happened, Antonio?  Have the people risen?  Why
have they been firing?"  She paused timidly at the head of the stairs,
as if fearing to descend.

"All is well," replied the President in his official manner.  "Some of
the disaffected have rioted, but the Colonel here has taken every
precaution and order reigns once more, dearest."  Then turning to
Sorrento, he went on: "It is possible that the disturbances may be
renewed.  The troops should be confined to barracks and you may give
them an extra day's pay to drink the health of the Republic.  Double
the Guards and you had better have the streets patrolled to-night.  In
case anything happens, you will find me here.  Good-night, Colonel."
He walked up a few steps, and the War-Minister, bowing gravely, turned
and departed.

The woman came down the stairs and they met midway.  He took both her
hands in his and smiled affectionately; she, standing one step above
him, bent forward and kissed him.  It was an amiable, though formal,
salutation.

"Well," he said, "we have got through to-day all right, my dear; but
how long it can go on, I do not know; the revolutionaries seem to get
stronger every day.  It was a very dangerous moment just now in the
square; but is over for the present."

"I have passed an anxious hour," she said, and then, catching sight for
the first time of his bruised forehead, she started.  "But you are
wounded."

"It is nothing," said the President.  "They threw stones; now, we used
bullets; they are better arguments."

"What happened at the Senate?"

"I had expected trouble, you know.  I told them in my speech that, in
spite of the unsettled state of affairs, we had decided to restore the
ancient Constitution of the Republic, but that it had been necessary to
purge the register of the disaffected and rebellious.  The Mayor took
it out of the box and they scrambled over each other to look at the
total electorates for the divisions.  When they saw how much they were
reduced they were very angry.  Godoy was speechless; he is a fool, that
man.  Louvet told them that it must be taken as an instalment, and that
as things got more settled the franchise would be extended; but they
howled with fury.  Indeed, had it not been for the ushers and for a few
men of the Guard, I believe they would have assaulted me there and then
in the very Chamber itself.  Moret shook his fist at me,--ridiculous
young ass--and rushed out to harangue the mob."

"And Savrola?"

"Oh, Savrola,--he was quite calm; he laughed when he saw the register.
'It is only a question of a few months,' he said; 'I wonder you think
it worth while.'  I told him that I did not understand him, but he
spoke the truth for all that;" and then, taking his wife's hand in his,
he climbed the stairs slowly and thoughtfully.

But there is little rest for a public man in times of civil
disturbance.  No sooner had Molara reached the top of the stairs and
entered the reception-room, than a man advanced to meet him from a door
at the far end.  He was small, dark, and very ugly, with a face
wrinkled with age and an indoor life.  Its pallor showed all the more
by contrast with his hair and short moustache, both of which were of
that purple blackness to which Nature is unable to attain.  In his hand
he carried a large bundle of papers, carefully disposed into
departments by his long and delicate fingers.  It was the Private
Secretary.

"What is it, Miguel?" asked the President; "you have some papers for
me?"

"Yes, Sir; a few minutes will suffice.  You have had an exciting day; I
rejoice it has terminated successfully."

"It has not been devoid of interest," said Molara, wearily.  "What have
you got for me?"

"Several foreign despatches.  Great Britain has sent a note about the
Sphere of Influence to the south of the African Colony, to which the
Foreign Minister has drafted a reply."

"Ah! these English,--how grasping, how domineering!  But we must be
firm.  I will maintain the territories of the Republic against all
enemies, internal or external.  We cannot send armies, but, thank God,
we can write despatches.  Is it strong enough?"

"Your Excellency need have no fears.  We have vindicated our rights
most emphatically; it will be a great moral victory."

"I hope we shall get material as well as moral good out of it.  The
country is rich; there is paying gold; that explains the note.  Of
course we must reply severely.  What else?"

"There are some papers relating to the army, commissions and
promotions, Sir," said Miguel, fingering one particular bundle of his
papers, the bundle that lay between his first and second fingers.
"Those sentences for confirmation, a draft of Morgon's Budget for
information and opinion, and one or two minor matters."

"H'm, a long business!  Very well, I will come and see to it.  Dearest,
you know how pressed I am.  We shall meet to-night at the dinner.  Have
all the Ministers accepted?"

"All but Louvet, Antonio.  He is detained by business."

"Business, pooh!  He is afraid of the streets at night.  What a thing
it is to be a coward!  Thus he misses a good dinner.  At eight then,
Lucile."  And with a quick and decided step he passed through the small
door of the private office followed by the Secretary.

Madame Antonio Molara remained standing for a moment in the great
reception-room.  Then she walked to the window and stepped out on to
the balcony.  The scene which stretched before her was one of
surpassing beauty.  The palace stood upon high ground commanding a wide
view of the city and the harbour.  The sun was low on the horizon, but
the walls of the houses still stood out in glaring white.  The red and
blue tiled roofs were relieved by frequent gardens and squares whose
green and graceful palms soothed and gratified the eye.  To the north
the great pile of the Senate House and Parliament buildings loomed up
majestic and imposing.  Westward lay the harbour with its shipping and
protecting forts.  A few warships floated in the roads, and many
white-sailed smacks dotted the waters of the Mediterranean Sea, which
had already begun to change their blue for the more gorgeous colours of
sunset.

As she stood there in the clear light of the autumn evening, she looked
divinely beautiful.  She had arrived at that age of life, when to the
attractions of a maiden's beauty are added those of a woman's wit.  Her
perfect features were the mirror of her mind, and displayed with every
emotion and every mood that vivacity of expression which is the
greatest of woman's charms.  Her tall figure was instinct with grace,
and the almost classic dress she wore enhanced her beauty and
harmonised with her surroundings.

Something in her face suggested a wistful aspiration.  Lucile had
married Antonio Molara nearly five years before, when he was in the
height and vigour of his power.  Her family had been among the stoutest
supporters of his cause, and her father and brother had lost their
lives on the battlefield of Sorato.  Her mother, broken down by
calamity and sorrow, lived only to commend her daughter to the care of
their most powerful friend, the general who had saved the State and
would now rule it.  He had accepted the task at first from a feeling of
obligation to those who had followed his star so faithfully, but
afterwards from other motives.  Before a month had passed he fell in
love with the beautiful girl whom Fortune had led to him.  She admired
his courage, his energy, and his resource; the splendours of the office
that he filled were not without their influence; he offered her wealth
and position,--almost a throne; and besides he was a fine figure of a
man.  She was twenty-three when they married.  For many months her life
had been a busy one.  Receptions, balls, and parties had filled the
winter season with the unremitting labour of entertaining.  Foreign
princes had paid her homage, not only as the loveliest woman in Europe,
but also as a great political figure.  Her _salon_ was crowded with the
most famous men from every country.  Statesmen, soldiers, poets, and
men of science had worshipped at the shrine.  She had mixed in matters
of State.  Suave and courtly ambassadors had thrown out delicate hints,
and she had replied with unofficial answers.  Plenipotentiaries had
explained the details of treaties and protocols, with remarkable
elaboration, for her benefit.  Philanthropists had argued, urged, and
expounded their views or whims.  Every one talked to her of public
business.  Even her maid had approached her with an application for the
advancement of her brother, a clerk in the Post Office; and every one
had admired her until admiration itself, the most delicious drink that
a woman tastes, became insipid.

But even during the first few years there had been something wanting.
What it was Lucile had never been able to guess.  Her husband was
affectionate and such time as he could spare from public matters was at
her service.  Of late things had been less bright.  The agitation of
the country, the rising forces of Democracy, added to the already heavy
business of the Republic, had taxed the President's time and energies
to the full.  Hard lines had come into his face, lines of work and
anxiety, and sometimes she had caught a look of awful weariness, as of
one who toils and yet foresees that his labour will be vain.  He saw
her less frequently, and in those short intervals talked more and more
of business and politics.

A feeling of unrest seemed to pervade the capital.  The season, which
had just begun, had opened badly.  Many of the great families had
remained in their summer residences on the slopes of the mountains,
though the plains were already cool and green; others had kept to their
own houses in the city, and only the most formal entertainments at the
palace had been attended.  As the outlook became more threatening it
seemed that she was able to help him less.  Passions were being roused
that blinded the eyes to beauty and dulled the mind to charm.  She was
still a queen, but her subjects were sullen and inattentive.  What
could she do to help him, now that he was so hard pressed?  The thought
of abdication was odious to her, as to every woman.  Must she remain
directing the ceremonies of the Court after the brilliancy had died
out, while enemies were working night and day to overturn all that she
was attached to?

"Can I do nothing, nothing?" she murmured.  "Have I played my part?  Is
the best of life over?" and then, with a hot wave of petulant resolve,
"I will do it,--but what?"

The question remained unanswered; the edge of the sun dipped beneath
the horizon and at the end of the military mole, from the shapeless
mound of earth that marked the protecting battery of the harbour,
sprang a puff of smoke.  It was the evening gun, and the sound of the
report, floating faintly up to her, interrupted the unpleasing
reflections which had filled her thoughts; but they left a memory
behind.  She turned with a sigh and re-entered the palace; gradually
the daylight died away and it became night.




CHAPTER III.

THE MAN OF THE MULTITUDE.

Dismay and bitter anger filled the city.  The news of the fusilade
spread fast and far, and, as is usual on such occasions, its effects
were greatly exaggerated.  But the police precautions were well
conceived and ably carried out.  Nothing like a crowd was allowed to
gather, and the constant patrolling of the streets prevented the
building of barricades.  The aspect of the Republican Guard was
moreover so formidable that, whatever the citizens might feel, they
found it discreet to display an acquiescent, and in some cases even a
contented demeanour.

With the leaders of the Popular party it was however different.  They
immediately assembled at the official residence of the Mayor, and a
furious discussion ensued.  In the hall of the Mayoralty an emergency
meeting was held, at which all the power of the party was represented.
Moret, the Civic Councillor and former editor of the suppressed TRUMPET
CALL, was much cheered as he entered the room.  His speech had appealed
to many, and the Lauranians were always ready to applaud a daring act.
Besides, every one was agitated by the recent riot and was eager to do
something.  The Labour delegates were particularly angry.  Working-men,
assembled in constitutional manner to express their grievances, had
been shot down by a hireling soldiery,--_massacred_ was the word most
generally used.  Vengeance must be taken; but how?  The wildest schemes
were suggested.  Moret, always for bold counsels, was for sallying into
the streets and rousing the people to arms; they would burn the palace,
execute the tyrant, and restore the liberties of the land.  Godoy, old
and cautious, strongly opposed the suggestion, though indeed no
particular eagerness was shown to adopt it.  He advocated a calm and
dignified attitude of reproach and censure, which would appeal to the
comity of nations and vindicate the justice of their cause.  Others
took up the argument.  Renos, the barrister, was for what he called
constitutional methods.  They should form themselves into a Committee
of Public Safety; they should appoint the proper officers of State
(including of course an Attorney-General), and decree the deposition of
the President for violation of the fundamental principles contained in
the preamble of the Declaration of National Rights.  He proceeded to
dilate upon the legal points involved, until interrupted by several
members who were anxious to offer their own remarks.

Several resolutions were passed.  It was agreed that the President had
forfeited the confidence of the citizens, and he was forthwith called
upon to resign his office and submit himself to the Courts of Law.  It
was also agreed that the army had deserved ill of the Republic.  It was
resolved to prosecute at civil law the soldiers who had fired on the
people, and a vote of sympathy was carried in favour of the relations
of the killed and wounded, or _martyrs_ as they were called.

This scene of impotence and futility was ended by the entrance of the
remarkable man who had raised a party from the dust, and had led them
from one success to another until it had seemed that the victory was
won.  Silence fell upon the assemblage; some stood up in respect;
everyone wondered what he would say.  How would he bear the crushing
defeat that had fallen upon them?  Would he despair of the movement?
Would he be angry or sad or cynical?  Above all, what course would he
propose?

He walked to the end of the long table around which the members were
grouped, and sat down deliberately.  Then he looked round the room,
with a face as calm and serene as ever.  In that scene of confusion and
indecision he looked magnificent.  His very presence imparted a feeling
of confidence to his followers.  His high and ample forehead might have
contained the answer to every question; his determined composure seemed
equal to the utmost stroke of Fate.

After a moment's pause, invited by the silence, he rose.  His words
were studiously moderate.  It had been a disappointment to him, he
said, to find that the registers had been mutilated.  The ultimate
success was deferred, but it was only deferred.  He had waited before
coming to the Mayoralty to make a few calculations.  They were
necessarily rough and hurried, but he thought they were approximately
correct.  The President, it was true, would have a majority in the
forthcoming Parliament, and a substantial majority; but they would win
certain seats, in spite of the restricted electorate; about fifty, he
thought, in a house of three hundred.  Smaller minorities than that had
overthrown more powerful Governments.  Every day added to their
strength; every day increased the hatred of the Dictator.  Besides,
there were other alternatives than constitutional procedure,--and at
these words some set their teeth and looked at each other in deep
significance--but for the present they must wait; and they could afford
to wait, for the prize was worth winning.  It was the most precious
possession in the world,--liberty.  He sat down amid brighter faces and
calmer minds.  The deliberations were resumed.  It was decided to
relieve, out of the general funds of the party, those who were in
poverty through the massacre of their relations; that would increase
their popularity with the working classes, and might win the sympathy
of foreign nations.  A deputation should wait on the President to
express the grief of the citizens at the mutilation of their ancient
register, and to beg that he would restore their franchises.  It should
also demand the punishment of the officers who had fired on the people,
and should acquaint the President with the alarm and indignation of the
city.  Savrola, Godoy, and Renos were named as the members of the
deputation, and the Reform Committee then dispersed quietly.

Moret lingered till the end and approached Savrola.  He was surprised
that he had not been suggested as a member of the deputation.  He knew
his leader much better than Renos, a pedantic lawyer who made few
friends: he had followed Savrola from the beginning with blind
enthusiasm and devotion; and he now felt hurt that he should be passed
over like this.

"It has been a bad day for us," he said tentatively; and then as
Savrola did not reply, he continued, "Who would have thought they would
have dared to trick us?"

"It has been a very bad day,--for you," replied Savrola thoughtfully.

"For me?  Why, what do you mean?"

"Have you reflected that you have forty human lives to answer for?
Your speech was useless,--what good could it do?  Their blood is on
your head.  The people too are cowed.  Much harm has been done; it is
your fault."

"My fault!  I was furious,--he cheated us,--I thought only of revolt.
I never dreamed you would sit down tamely like this.  That devil should
be killed now, at once,--before more mischief happens."

"Look here, Moret: I am as young as you; I feel as acutely; I am full
of enthusiasm.  I, too, hate Molara more than is wise or philosophic;
but I contain myself, when nothing is to be gained by giving way.  Now
mark my words.  Either you learn to do so, or you can go your ways, for
I will have none of you,--politically, that is,--as a friend, it is
different."

He sat down and began to write a letter, while Moret, pale with that
mortification which is made up of anger and self-reproach, and
quivering under his rebuke, left the room in haste.

Savrola remained.  There was much business to do that evening; letters
had to be written and read, the tone of the leading-articles in the
Democratic Press explained, and many other matters decided.  The
machinery of a great party, and still more of a great conspiracy,
needed careful and constant attention.  It was nine o'clock before he
finished.

"Well, good-night, Godoy," he said to the Major; "we shall have another
busy day to-morrow.  We must contrive to frighten the Dictator.  Let me
know at what time he will give audience."

At the door of the Mayoralty he called a hackney-coach, a conveyance
which neither the dulness of the social season nor the excitement of
political affairs could restrain from its customary occupation.  After
a short drive he arrived at a small though not inelegant house, for he
was a man of means, in the most fashionable quarter of the town.  An
old woman opened the door to his knock.  She looked rejoiced to see him.

"La," she said, "I have had a fearful time with you away, and all this
shooting and noise.  But the afternoons are chilly now and you should
have had your coat; I fear you will have a cold to-morrow."

"It is all right, Bettine," he answered kindly; "I have a good chest,
thanks to your care; but I am very tired.  Send me some soup to my
room; I will not dine to-night."

He went upstairs, while she bustled off to get him the best dinner she
could improvise.  The apartments he lived in were on the second
storey--a bedroom, a bathroom, and a study.  They were small, but full
of all that taste and luxury could devise and affection and industry
preserve.  A broad writing-table occupied the place of honour.  It was
arranged so that the light fell conveniently to the hand and head.  A
large bronze inkstand formed the centrepiece, with a voluminous
blotting-book of simple manufacture spread open before it.  The rest of
the table was occupied by papers on files.  The floor, in spite of the
ample waste-paper basket, was littered with scraps.  It was the
writing-table of a public man.

The room was lit by electric light in portable shaded lamps.  The walls
were covered with shelves, filled with well-used volumes.  To that
Pantheon of Literature none were admitted till they had been read and
valued.  It was a various library: the philosophy of Schopenhauer
divided Kant from Hegel, who jostled the Memoirs of St. Simon and the
latest French novel; RASSELAS and LA CURÉE lay side by side; eight
substantial volumes of Gibbon's famous History were not perhaps
inappropriately prolonged by a fine edition of the DECAMERON; the
ORIGIN OF SPECIES rested by the side of a black-letter Bible; THE
REPUBLIC maintained an equilibrium with VANITY FAIR and the HISTORY OF
EUROPEAN MORALS.  A volume of Macaulay's Essays lay on the
writing-table itself; it was open, and that sublime passage whereby the
genius of one man has immortalised the genius of another was marked in
pencil.  _And history, while for the warning of vehement, high, and
daring natures, she notes his many errors, will yet deliberately
pronounce that among the eminent men whose bones lie near his, scarcely
one has left a more stainless, and none a more splendid name_.

A half-empty box of cigarettes stood on a small table near a low
leathern armchair, and by its side lay a heavy army-revolver, against
the barrel of which the ashes of many cigarettes had been removed.  In
the corner of the room stood a small but exquisite Capitoline Venus,
the cold chastity of its colour reproaching the allurements of its
form.  It was the chamber of a philosopher, but of no frigid, academic
recluse; it was the chamber of a man, a human man, who appreciated all
earthly pleasures, appraised them at their proper worth, enjoyed, and
despised them.

There were still some papers and telegrams lying unopened on the table,
but Savrola was tired; they could, or at any rate should wait till the
morning.  He dropped into his chair.  Yes, it had been a long day, and
a gloomy day.  He was a young man, only thirty-two, but already he felt
the effects of work and worry.  His nervous temperament could not fail
to be excited by the vivid scenes through which he had lately passed,
and the repression of his emotion only heated the inward fire.  Was it
worth it?  The struggle, the labour, the constant rush of affairs, the
sacrifice of so many things that make life easy, or pleasant--for what?
A people's good!  That, he could not disguise from himself, was rather
the direction than the cause of his efforts.  Ambition was the motive
force, and he was powerless to resist it.  He could appreciate the
delights of an artist, a life devoted to the search for beauty, or of
sport, the keenest pleasure that leaves no sting behind.  To live in
dreamy quiet and philosophic calm in some beautiful garden, far from
the noise of men and with every diversion that art and intellect could
suggest, was, he felt, a more agreeable picture.  And yet he knew that
he could not endure it.  'Vehement, high, and daring' was his cast of
mind.  The life he lived was the only one he could ever live; he must
go on to the end.  The end comes often early to such men, whose spirits
are so wrought that they know rest only in action, contentment in
danger, and in confusion find their only peace.

His thoughts were interrupted by the entrance of the old woman with a
tray.  He was tired, but the decencies of life had to be observed; he
rose, and passed into the inner room to change his clothes and make his
toilet.  When he returned, the table was laid; the soup he had asked
for had been expanded by the care of his house-keeper into a more
elaborate meal.  She waited on him, plying him the while with questions
and watching his appetite with anxious pleasure.  She had nursed him
from his birth up with a devotion and care which knew no break.  It is
a strange thing, the love of these women.  Perhaps it is the only
disinterested affection in the world.  The mother loves her child; that
is material nature.  The youth loves his sweetheart; that too may be
explained.  The dog loves his master; he feeds him; a man loves his
friend; he has stood by him perhaps at doubtful moments.  In all there
are reasons; but the love of a foster-mother for her charge appears
absolutely irrational.  It is one of the few proofs, not to be
explained even by the association of ideas, that the nature of mankind
is superior to mere utilitarianism, and that his destinies are high.

The light and frugal supper finished, the old woman departed with the
plates, and he fell to his musings again.  Several difficult affairs
impended in the future, about the conduct of which he was doubtful.  He
dismissed them from his mind; why should he be always oppressed with
matters of fact?  What of the night?  He rose, walked to the window,
and drawing the curtains looked out.  The street was very quiet, but in
the distance he thought he heard the tramp of a patrol.  All the houses
were dark and sullen; overhead the stars shone brightly; it was a
perfect night to watch them.

He closed the window and taking a candle walked to a curtained door on
one side of the room; it opened on a narrow, spiral stair which led to
the flat roof.  Most of the houses in Laurania were low, and Savrola
when he reached the leads overlooked the sleeping city.  Lines of
gas-lamps marked the streets and squares, and brighter dots indicated
the positions of the shipping in the harbour.  But he did not long look
at these; he was for the moment weary of men and their works.  A small
glass observatory stood in one corner of this aerial platform, the nose
of the telescope showing through the aperture.  He unlocked the door
and entered.  This was a side of his life that the world never saw; he
was no mathematician intent on discovery or fame, but he loved to watch
the stars for the sake of their mysteries.  By a few manipulations the
telescope was directed at the beautiful planet of Jupiter, at this time
high in the northern sky.  The glass was a powerful one, and the great
planet, surrounded by his attendant moons, glowed with splendour.  The
clock-work gear enabled him to keep it under continual observation as
the earth rolled over with the hours.  Long he watched it, becoming
each moment more under the power of the spell that star-gazing
exercises on curious, inquiring humanity.

At last he rose, his mind still far away from earth.  Molara, Moret,
the Party, the exciting scenes of the day, all seemed misty and unreal;
another world, a world more beautiful, a world of boundless
possibilities, enthralled his imagination.  He thought of the future of
Jupiter, of the incomprehensible periods of time that would elapse
before the cooling process would render life possible on its surface,
of the slow steady march of evolution, merciless, inexorable.  How far
would it carry them, the unborn inhabitants of an embryo world?
Perhaps only to some vague distortion of the vital essence; perhaps
further than he could dream of.  All the problems would be solved, all
the obstacles overcome; life would attain perfect developement.  And
then fancy, overleaping space and time, carried the story to periods
still more remote.  The cooling process would continue; the perfect
developement of life would end in death; the whole solar system, the
whole universe itself, would one day be cold and lifeless as a
burned-out firework.

It was a mournful conclusion.  He locked up the observatory and
descended the stairs, hoping that his dreams would contradict his
thoughts.




CHAPTER IV.

THE DEPUTATION.

It was the President's custom to rise early, but before doing so he
invariably received the newspapers and read such remarks as dealt with
the policy of the Government or criticised its actions.  This morning
his literature was exceptionally plentiful.  All the papers had leading
articles on the restriction of the franchise and the great riot which
had followed its announcement.  He first opened THE HOUR, the organ of
orthodox mediocrity, which usually cautiously supported the Government
in consideration of occasional pieces of news with which it was from
time to time favoured.  In a column and a half of print THE HOUR gently
regretted that the President had been unable to restore the franchises
unimpaired; it thus gratified the bulk of its readers.  In a second
column it expressed its severe disapproval--(_unqualified condemnation_
was the actual term)--of the disgraceful riot which had led to such
_deplorable consequences_; it thus repaid the President for sending
round the text of the English note, which had arrived the night before,
and which it printed _verbatim_ with pomp and circumstance as coming
from Our Special Correspondent in London.

THE COURTIER, the respectable morning journal of the upper classes,
regretted that so unseemly a riot should have taken place at the
beginning of the season, and expressed a hope that it would not in any
way impair the brilliancy of the State Ball which was to take place on
the 7th.  It gave an excellent account of the President's first
ministerial dinner, with the _menu_ duly appended, and it was concerned
to notice that Señor Louvet, Minister of the Interior, had been
suffering from an indisposition which prevented his attending the
function.  THE DIURNAL GUSHER, a paper with an enormous circulation,
refrained from actual comments but published an excellent account of
the _massacre_, to the harrowing details of which it devoted much
fruity sentiment and morbid imagination.

These were practically the organs on which the Government relied for
support, and the President always read them first to fortify himself
against the columns of abuse with which the Radical, Popular, and
Democratic Press saluted him, his Government, and all his works.  The
worst result of an habitual use of strong language is that when a
special occasion really does arise, there is no way of marking it.  THE
FABIAN, THE SUNSPOT, and THE RISING TIDE had already exhausted every
epithet in their extensive vocabularies on other and less important
incidents.  Now that a severe fusilade had been made upon the citizens
and an ancient privilege attacked, they were reduced to comparative
moderation as the only outlet for their feelings.  They had compared
the Head of the State so often and so vividly to Nero and Iscariot,
very much to the advantage of those worthies, that it was difficult to
know how they could deal with him now.  They nevertheless managed to
find a few unused expressions, and made a great point of the
Ministerial dinner as being an instance of his "brutal disregard of the
commonest instincts of humanity."  THE SUNSPOT was thought by its
readers to have been particularly happy in alluding to the ministers
as, "Indulging in a foul orgie of gluttony and dipping their
blood-stained fingers in choice dishes, while the bodies of their
victims lay unburied and unavenged."

Having finished his perusal the President pushed the last paper off the
bed and frowned.  He cared nothing for criticism, but he knew the power
of the Press and he knew that it reflected as well as influenced public
opinion.  There could be no doubt that the balance was rising against
him.

At breakfast he was moody and silent, and Lucile tactfully refrained
from irritating him by the laboured commonplaces of matutinal
conversation.  By nine o'clock he was always at work and this morning
he began earlier than usual.  The Secretary was already at his table
busily writing when Molara entered.  He rose and bowed, a formal bow,
which seemed an assertion of equality rather than a tribute of respect.
The President nodded and walked to his table on which such parts of
correspondence as needed his personal attention were neatly arranged.
He sat down and began to read.  Occasionally he uttered an exclamation
of assent or disapproval, and his pencil was often employed to express
his decisions and opinions.  From time to time Miguel collected the
papers he had thus dealt with and carried them to the inferior
secretaries in the adjoining room, whose duty it was to elaborate into
the stately pomposity of official language such phrases as "Curt
Refusal" "Certainly not" "Apply to War Office" "Gushing Reply" "I do
not agree" "See last year's Report."

Lucile also had letters to read and write.  Having finished these she
determined to take a drive in the park.  For the last few weeks, since,
in fact, they had returned from their summer residence, she had
discontinued what had been in former years her usual practice; but
after the scenes and riots of the day before she felt it her duty to
display a courage which she did not feel.  It might help her husband,
for her beauty was such that an artistic people invariably showed her
respect.  It could at least do no harm, and besides she was weary of
the palace and its gardens.  With this intention her carriage was
ordered and she was about to enter it, when a young man arrived at the
door.  He saluted her gravely.

It was the boast of the citizens of the Republic of Laurania that they
never brought politics into private life or private life into politics.
How far they justified it will appear later.  The present situation had
undoubtedly strained the principle to the full, but civilities were
still exchanged between political antagonists.  Lucile, who had known
the great Democrat as a frequent visitor at her father's house before
the Civil War, and who had always kept up a formal acquaintance with
him, smiled and bowed in return and asked whether he came to see the
President.

"Yes," he replied.  "I have an appointment."

"Public matters I suppose?" she inquired with the suspicion of a smile.

"Yes," he repeated somewhat abruptly.

"How tiresome you all are," she said daringly, "with your public
businesses and solemn looks.  I hear nothing but matters of State from
morning till night, and now, when I fly the palace for an hour's
relaxation, they meet me at the very door."

Savrola smiled.  It was impossible to resist her charm.  The admiration
he had always felt for her beauty and her wit asserted itself in spite
of the watchful and determined state of mind into which he had thrown
himself as a preparation for his interview with the President.  He was
a young man, and Jupiter was not the only planet he admired.  "Your
Excellency," he said, "must acquit me of all intention."

"I do," she answered laughing, "and release you from all further
punishment."

She signed to the coachman and bowing, drove off.

He entered the palace and was ushered by a footman resplendent in the
blue and buff liveries of the Republic, into an ante-room.  A young
officer of the Guard, the Lieutenant who had commanded the escort on
the previous day, received him.  The President would be disengaged in a
few minutes.  The other members of the deputation had not yet arrived;
in the meantime would he take a chair?  The Lieutenant regarded him
dubiously, as one might view some strange animal, harmless enough to
look at, but about whose strength, when roused, there were
extraordinary stories.  He had been brought up in the most correct
regimental ideas: the people (by which he meant the mob) were "swine";
their leaders were the same, with an adjective prefixed; democratic
institutions, Parliament, and such like, were all "rot."  It therefore
appeared that he and Savrola would find few topics in common.  But
besides his good looks and good manners, the young soldier had other
attainments; his men knew him as "all right" and "all there," while the
Lancers of the Guard polo team regarded him as a most promising player.

Savrola, whose business it was to know everything, inquired respecting
the project lately mooted by the Lauranian Cavalry of sending a polo
team to England to compete in the great annual tournament at
Hurlingham.  Lieutenant Tiro (for that was his name) addressed himself
to the subject with delight.  They disputed as to who should be taken
as "back."  The discussion was only interrupted by the entrance of the
Mayor and Renos, and the Subaltern went off to inform the President
that the deputation waited.

"I will see them at once," said Molara; "show them up here."

The deputation were accordingly conducted up the stairs to the
President's private room.  He rose and received them with courtesy.
Godoy stated the grievances of the citizens.  He recalled the protests
they had made against the unconstitutional government of the last five
years, and their delight at the President's promise to call the Estates
together.  He described their bitter disappointment at the restriction
of the franchise, and their keen desire that it should be fully
restored.  He dilated on their indignation at the cruelty with which
the soldiers had shot down unarmed men, and finally declared that, as
Mayor, he could not vouch for their continued loyalty to the President
or their respect for his person.  Renos spoke in the same strain,
dwelling particularly on the legal aspect of the President's late
action, and on the gravity of its effects as a precedent to posterity.

Molara replied at some length.  He pointed out the disturbed state of
the country, and particularly of the capital; he alluded to the
disorders of the late war and the sufferings it had caused to the mass
of the people.  What the State wanted was strong stable government.  As
things became more settled the franchise should be extended until it
would ultimately be completely restored.  In the meanwhile, what was
there to complain about?  Law and order were maintained; the public
service was well administered; the people enjoyed peace and security.
More than that, a vigorous foreign policy held the honour of the
country high.  They should have an instance.

He turned and requested Miguel to read the reply to the English note on
the African Dispute.  The Secretary stood up and read the paper in
question, his soft, purring voice, proving well suited to emphasising
the insults it contained.

"And that, Gentlemen," said the President, when it was finished, "is
addressed to one of the greatest military and naval powers in the
world."

Godoy and Renos were silent.  Their patriotism was roused; their pride
was gratified; but Savrola smiled provokingly.  "It will take more than
despatches," he said, "to keep the English out of the African sphere,
or to reconcile the people of Laurania to your rule."

"And if stronger measures should be necessary," said the President,
"rest assured they will be taken."

"After the events of yesterday we need no such assurance."

The President ignored the taunt.  "I know the English Government," he
continued; "they will not appeal to arms."

"And I," said Savrola, "know the Lauranian people.  I am not so
confident."

There was a long pause.  Both men faced each other, and their eyes met.
It was the look of two swordsmen who engage, and it was the look of two
bitter enemies; they appeared to measure distances and calculate
chances.  Then Savrola turned away, the ghost of a smile still
lingering on his lips; but he had read the President's heart and he
felt as if he had looked into hell.

"It is a matter of opinion, Sir," said Molara at last.

"It will soon be a matter of history."

"Other tales will have to be told before," said the President, and then
with great formality, "I am obliged to you, Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen,
for representing the dangerous elements of disorder which exist among
certain classes of the people.  You may rely on every precaution being
taken to prevent an outbreak.  I beg you will keep me further informed.
Good morning."

The only course open appeared to be the door, and the deputation
withdrew, after Savrola had thanked the President for his audience and
had assured him that he would lose no opportunity of bringing home to
him the hostile attitude of the citizens.  On the way down-stairs they
were met by Lucile, who had returned unexpectedly early from her drive.
She saw by the expression of their faces that a heated discussion had
taken place.  Godoy and Renos she passed unnoticed, but she smiled
merrily at Savrola, as if to convey to him that she was uninterested by
politics and could not understand how people ever managed to get
excited about them.  The smile did not deceive him; he knew too much of
her tastes and talents, but he admired her all the more for her acting.

He walked home.  The interview had not been altogether unsatisfactory.
He had never hoped to convince the President; that indeed was hardly
likely; but they had expressed the views of the people, and Godoy and
Renos had already sent copies of their remarks to the newspapers, so
that the party could not complain of their leaders' inaction at such a
crisis.  He thought he had frightened Molara, if indeed it were
possible to frighten such a man; at any rate he had made him angry.
When he thought of this he was glad.  Why?  He had always hitherto
repressed such unphilosophic and futile emotions so far as possible,
but somehow to-day he felt his dislike of the President was invested
with a darker tinge.  And then his mind reverted to Lucile.  What a
beautiful woman she was!  How full of that instinctive knowledge of
human feelings which is the source of all true wit!  Molara was a lucky
man to have such a wife.  Decidedly he hated him personally, but that,
of course, was on account of his unconstitutional conduct.

When he reached his rooms, Moret was awaiting him, much excited and
evidently angry.  He had written several long letters to his leader,
acquainting him with his unalterable decision to sever all connection
with him and his party; but he had torn them all up, and was now
resolved to tell him in plain words.

Savrola saw his look.  "Ah, Louis," he cried, "I am glad you are here.
How good of you to come!  I have just left the President; he is
recalcitrant; he will not budge an inch.  I need your advice.  What
course shall we adopt?"

"What has happened?" asked the young man, sulkily but curiously.

Savrola related the interview with graphic terseness.  Moret listened
attentively and then said, still with great ill humour, "Physical force
is the only argument he understands.  I am for raising the people."

"Perhaps you are right," said Savrola reflectively, "I am half inclined
to agree with you."

Moret argued his proposition with vigour and earnestness, and never had
his leader seemed so agreeable to the violent measures he proposed.
For half an hour they discussed the point.  Savrola still appeared
unconvinced; he looked at his watch.  "It is past two o'clock," he
said.  "Let us lunch here and thrash the matter out."

They did so.  The luncheon was excellent, and the host's arguments
became more and more convincing.  At last, with the coffee, Moret
admitted that perhaps it was better to wait, and they parted with great
cordiality.




CHAPTER V.

A PRIVATE CONVERSATION.

"That," said the President to his confidential secretary, so soon as
the door had closed on the retiring deputation, "is over, but we shall
have plenty more in the future.  Savrola will most certainly be elected
for the Central Division, and we shall then have the pleasure of
listening to him in the Senate."

"Unless," added Miguel, "anything should happen."

The President, who knew his man well, understood the implication.  "No,
it is no good; we cannot do that.  Fifty years ago it might have been
possible.  People won't stand that sort of thing now-a-days; even the
army might have scruples.  So long as he keeps within the law, I don't
see how we can touch him constitutionally."

"He is a great force, a great force; sometimes, I think, the greatest
in Laurania.  Every day he grows stronger.  Presently the end will
come," said the Secretary slowly and thoughtfully, who, as the partner
of Molara's dangers, no less than of his actions, had a claim to be
heard.  "I think the end is coming," he continued; "perhaps quite
soon--unless----?" he paused.

"I tell you it can't be done.  Any accident that happened would be
attributed to me.  It would mean a revolution here, and close every
asylum abroad."

"There are other ways besides force, physical force."

"None that I can see, and he is a strong man."

"So was Samson, nevertheless the Philistines spoiled him."

"Through a woman.  I don't believe he has ever been in love."

"That is no reason against the future."

"Wanted a Delilah," said the President dryly.  "Perhaps you will find
one for him."

The Secretary's eyes wandered round the room artlessly, and paused for
a moment on a photograph of Lucile.

"How dare you, Sir!  You are a scoundrel!  You have not an ounce of
virtue in you!"

"We have been associated for some time, General."  He always called him
_General_ on these occasions, it reminded the President of various
little incidents which had taken place when they had worked together
during the war.  "Perhaps that is the cause."

"You are impertinent."

"My interests are concerned.  I too have enemies.  You know very well
how much my life would be worth without the protection of the Secret
Police.  I only remember with whom and for whom these things were done."

"Perhaps I am hasty, Miguel, but there is a limit, even between----"
He was going to say _friends_ but Miguel interposed _accomplices_.
"Well," said Molara, "I do not care what you call it.  What is your
proposition?"

"The Philistines," replied Miguel, "spoiled Samson, but Delilah had to
cut his hair first."

"Do you mean that she should implore him to hold his hand?"

"No, I think that would be useless, but if he were compromised----"

"But she, she would not consent.  It would involve her."

"She need not necessarily know.  Another object for making his
acquaintance might be suggested.  It would come as a surprise to her."

"You are a scoundrel--an infernal scoundrel," said the President
quietly.

Miguel smiled, as one who receives a compliment.  "The matter," he
said, "is too serious for the ordinary rules of decency and honour.
Special cases demand special remedies."

"She would never forgive me."

"The forgiveness would rest with you.  Your charity would enable you to
pardon an uncommitted crime.  You have only to play the jealous husband
and own your mistake later on."

"And he?"

"Fancy the great popular leader.  Patriot, Democrat, what not,
discovered fawning to the tyrant's wife!  Why, the impropriety alone
would disgust many.  And more than that,--observe him begging for
mercy, grovelling at the President's feet,--a pretty picture!  It would
ruin him; ridicule alone would kill him."

"It might," said Molara.  The picture pleased him.

"It must.  It is the only chance that I can see, and it need cost you
nothing.  Every woman is secretly flattered by the jealousy of the man
she loves, even if he be her husband."

"How do you know these things?" asked Molara, looking at the ugly
pinched figure and glistening hair of his companion.

"_I_ know," said Miguel with a grin of odious pride.  The suggestion of
his appetites was repulsive.  The President was conscious of disgust.
"Mr. Secretary Miguel," he said with the air of one who has made up his
mind, "I must request you not to speak to me of this matter again.  I
consider it shows less to the advantage of your heart than of your
head."

"I see by Your Excellency's manner that further allusion is
unnecessary."

"Have you the report of the Agricultural Committee for last year?
Good,--please have a _précis_ made of it; I want some facts.  The
country may be kept, even if we lose the capital; that means a good
part of the army."

Thus the subject dropped.  Each understood the other, and behind lay
the spur of danger.

After the President had finished the morning's business, he rose to
leave the room, but before he did so he turned to Miguel and said
abruptly: "It would be a great convenience for us to know what course
the Opposition intends to pursue on the opening of the Senate, would it
not?"

"Assuredly."

"How can we induce Savrola to speak?  He is incorruptible."

"There is another method."

"I tell you physical force is not to be thought of."

"There is another method."

"And that," said the President, "I directed you not to speak of again."

"Precisely," said the Secretary, and resumed his writing.

The garden into which Molara walked was one of the most beautiful and
famous in a country where all vegetation attained luxuriant forms.  The
soil was fertile, the sun hot, and the rains plentiful.  It displayed
an attractive disorder.  The Lauranians were no admirers of that
peculiar taste which finds beauty in the exact arrangement of an equal
number of small trees of symmetrical shape in mathematical designs, or
in the creation of geometrical figures by means of narrow paths with
box-hedges.  They were an unenlightened people, and their gardens
displayed a singular contempt for geometry and precision.  Great blazes
of colour arranged in pleasing contrasts were the lights, and cool
green arbours the shades of their rural pictures.  Their ideal of
gardening was to make every plant grow as freely as if directed by
nature, and to as high perfection as if cultivated by art.  If the
result was not artistic, it was at least beautiful.

The President, however, cared very little for flowers or their
arrangement; he was, he said, too busy a man to have anything to do
with the beauties of colour, harmony, or line.  Neither the tints of
the rose nor the smell of the jasmine awakened in him more than the
rudimentary physical pleasures which are natural and involuntary.  He
liked to have a good flower garden, because it was the right thing to
have, because it enabled him to take people there and talk to them
personally on political matters, and because it was convenient for
afternoon receptions.  But he himself took no interest in it.  The
kitchen garden appealed to him more; his practical soul rejoiced more
in an onion than an orchid.

He was full of thought after his conversation with Miguel, and turned
down the shady path which led to the fountains with long, hasty
strides.  Things were looking desperate.  It was, as Miguel had said, a
question of time, unless,--unless Savrola were removed or discredited.
He refrained from precisely formulating the idea that had taken
possession of his mind.  He had done many things in the rough days of
the war when he was a struggling man, the memory of which was not
pleasant.  He remembered a brother officer, a rising man, the colonel
of a regiment, who had been a formidable rival; at a critical moment he
had withheld the supports, and left it to the enemy to remove one
obstacle from his path.  Then another tale came into his mind which
also was not a pretty one, a tale of a destroyed treaty, and a broken
truce; of men, who had surrendered to terms, shot against the wall of
the fort they had held so long.  He also recalled with annoyance the
methods he had adopted to extract information from the captured spy;
five years of busy life, of success and fortune, had not obscured the
memory of the man's face as it writhed in suffering.  But this new idea
seemed the most odious of all.  He was unscrupulous, but like many men
in history or modern life, he had tried to put away a discreditable
past.  Henceforth, he had said when he obtained power, he would abandon
such methods: they would no longer be necessary; and yet, here was the
need already.  Besides, Lucile was so beautiful; he loved her in his
hard way for that alone; and she was such a consort, so tactful, so
brilliant, that he admired and valued her from a purely official
standpoint.  If she ever knew, she would never forgive him.  She never
should know, but still he hated the idea.

But what other course remained?  He thought of the faces of the crowd
the day before; of Savrola; of the stories which reached him from the
army; of other tales of a darker and more mysterious kind,--tales of
strange federations and secret societies, which suggested murder, as
well as revolution.  The tide was rising; it was dangerous to tarry.

And then the alternative presented itself; flight, abdication, a
squalid existence in some foreign country, despised, insulted,
suspected; and exiles always lived to a great age he had heard.  He
would not think of it; he would die first; nothing but death should
drag him from the palace, and he would fight to the last.  His mind
returned to the starting point of his reflections.  Here was a chance,
the one solution which seemed possible; it was not an agreeable one,
but it was that or none.  He had reached the end of the path and
turning the corner saw Lucile seated by the fountain.  It was a
beautiful picture.

She saw his preoccupied look and rose to meet him.  "What is the
matter, Antonio?  You look worried."

"Things are going wrong with us, my dear.  Savrola, the deputation, the
newspapers, and, above all, the reports I receive of the people, are
ominous and alarming."

"I noticed black looks this morning when I drove.  Do you think there
is danger?"

"I do," he answered in his precise official manner, "grave danger."

"I wish I could help you," she said, "but I am only a woman.  What can
I do?"  He did not answer and she continued: "Señor Savrola is a kind
man.  I used to know him quite well before the war."

"He will ruin us."

"Surely not."

"We shall have to fly the country, if indeed they allow us to do that."

She turned paler.  "But I know what men look like; there is a sympathy
between us; he is no fanatic."

"There are powers behind and beneath him of which he knows little,
which he cannot control, but which he has invoked."

"Can you do nothing?"

"I cannot arrest him; he is too popular, and besides he has broken no
law.  He will go on.  In a fortnight are the elections; he will be
returned in spite of my precautions; then the trouble will begin."  He
paused, and then speaking as if to himself continued: "If we could
learn what he means to do, perhaps we might defeat it."

"Can I not help you?" she asked quickly.  "I know him; I think he likes
me.  He might whisper to me what he would not tell to others."  She
thought of many victories in the past.

"My darling," said Molara, "why should you spoil your life by mixing in
the darker side of politics?  I would not ask you."

"But I want to.  I will try if it would help you."

"It might do much more."

"Very well, I will find out for you; in a fortnight you shall know.  He
must come to the State Ball; I will meet him there."

"I am loth to let you talk to such a man, but I know your wit, and the
need is great.  But will he come?"

"I will write him a note with the invitation," she said, "laugh at
politics and advise him to keep his private life at least free from
them.  I think he will come; if not, I will find some other way of
seeing him."

Molara looked at her with admiration.  At no time did he love her more
than when he realised of what use she was to him.  "I leave it to you,
then.  I fear you will fail, but if you can do it, you may have saved
the State.  If not, no harm will have been done."

"I shall succeed," she answered confidently, and rising from her seat
began to walk towards the house.  She saw from her husband's manner
that he would like to be alone.

He remained seated there for a long time, staring into the water in
which the fat, lazy, gold fish swam placidly.  His face wore the
expression of one who has swallowed some nasty thing.




CHAPTER VI.

ON CONSTITUTIONAL GROUNDS.

The sagacious founders of the Lauranian Republic had recognised the
importance of preserving and promoting the practice of social
civilities between the public men of the State, irrespective of party.
It had therefore long been the custom for the President to give several
official entertainments during the autumn season, to which all the
distinguished characters of either side were invited, and which it was
considered _etiquette_ to attend.  This year feeling ran so high and
relations were so strained that Savrola had decided not to accept, and
had already formally declined the invitation; he was therefore not a
little surprised when he received a second card, and still more when he
read Lucile's note which accompanied it.

He saw she had exposed herself to a rebuff with her eyes open, and
wondered why she had done so.  Of course she counted on her charms.  It
is hard, if not impossible, to snub a beautiful woman; they remain
beautiful and the rebuke recoils.  He might indeed have made political
capital out of so pressing an invitation sent at such a critical time;
but he felt she had judged him well, and knew she was safe at least
from that.  This pleased him.  He was sorry he could not go; but he had
made up his mind, and sat down to write and decline.  Half way through
the letter, he paused; the thought occurred to him, that perhaps she
might stand in need of his help.  He read the letter again and fancied,
though the words did not warrant it, that he detected a note of appeal.
And then he began to look for reasons for changing his mind: the old
established custom; the necessity of showing his followers that for the
present he was in favour of constitutional agitation only; the
opportunity of displaying his confidence in the success of his plans;
in fact, every argument, but the true one, was arrayed against his
determination.

Yes, he would go: the party might object, but he did not care; it was
none of their business, and he was strong enough to face their
displeasure.  These reflections were interrupted by the entrance of
Moret, his face glowing with enthusiasm.

"The Central Division Committee have nominated you unanimously as their
candidate at the elections.  The Dictator's puppet, Tranta, was howled
down.  I have arranged for a public meeting on Thursday night for you
to address.  We are on the crest of the wave!"

"Capital!" said Savrola.  "I had expected to be nominated; our
influence in the capital is supreme.  I am glad of an opportunity of
speaking; I have not had a meeting for some time, and there is a good
deal to talk about just now.  What day did you say you had arranged it
for?"

"Thursday in the City-Hall at eight in the evening," said Moret, who,
though sanguine, was not unbusiness-like.

"Thursday?"

"Yes, you are not engaged anywhere."

"Well," said Savrola speaking slowly and appearing to weigh his words,
"Thursday is the night of the State Ball."

"I know," said Moret, "that was why I arranged it so.  They will feel
they are dancing on a volcano; only a mile from the palace will be the
people, massed, agreed, determined.  Molara will not enjoy his evening;
Louvet will not go; Sorrento will be making arrangements to massacre,
if necessary.  It will spoil the festivities; they will all see the
writing on the wall."

"Thursday will not do, Moret."

"Not do!  Why not?"

"Because I am going to the ball that night," said Savrola deliberately.

Moret gasped.  "What," he cried, "you!"

"Most certainly I shall go.  The ancient customs of the State cannot be
set aside like this.  It is my duty to go; we are fighting for the
Constitution, and we are bound to show our respect for its principles."

"You will accept Molara's hospitality,--enter his house,--eat his food?"

"No," said Savrola; "I shall eat the food provided by the State.  As
you well know, the expenses of these official functions are chargeable
to the public."

"You will talk to him?"

"Certainly, but he will not enjoy it."

"You will insult him, then?"

"My dear Moret, what should make you think that?  I shall be very
civil.  That will frighten him most of all; he will not know what is
impending."

"You cannot go," said Moret decidedly.

"Indeed I am going."

"Think what the Trade-Unions will say."

"I have thought about all these things and have made up my mind," said
Savrola.  "They may say what they like.  It will show them that I do
not intend to discard Constitutional methods for a long time yet.
These people want their enthusiasm cooling from time to time; they take
life too seriously."

"They will accuse you of betraying the cause."

"I have no doubt stupid people will make characteristic remarks, but I
trust none of my friends will bore me by repeating them to me."

"What will Strelitz say?  It will very likely make him cross the
frontier with his followers.  He thinks we are lukewarm, and has been
growing more impatient every week."

"If he comes before we are ready to help, the troops will make short
work of him and his rabble.  But he has definite orders from me and
will, I hope, obey them."

"You are doing wrong, and you know it," said Moret harshly and
savagely; "to say nothing of the contemptible humiliation of cringing
to your enemy."

Savrola smiled at his follower's anger.  "Oh," he said, "I shall not
cringe.  Come, you have not yet seen me do that," and he put his hand
on his companion's arm.  "It is strange, Louis," he continued, "that we
differ in so many things, and yet, if I were in difficulty and doubt,
there is no one to whom I would go sooner than to you.  We squabble
about trifles, but if it were a great matter, your judgment should rule
me, and you know it well."

Moret yielded.  He always yielded to Savrola when he talked like that.
"Well," he said, "when will you speak?"

"Whenever you like."

"Friday, then, the sooner the better."

"Very well; do you make the arrangements; I will find something to say."

"I wish you were not going," said Moret, reverting to his former
objection; "nothing on earth would induce me to go."

"Moret," said Savrola with strange earnestness, "we have settled that;
there are other things to talk about.  I am troubled in my mind.  There
is an undercurrent of agitation, the force of which I cannot gauge.  I
am the acknowledged leader of the party, but sometimes I realise that
there are agencies at work, which I do not control.  That secret
society they call the League is an unknown factor.  I hate that fellow,
that German fellow, Kreutze, Number One as he styles himself.  He is
the source of all the opposition I encounter in the party itself; the
Labour Delegates all seem to be under his influence.  Indeed there are
moments when I think that you and I and Godoy and all who are striving
for the old Constitution, are but the political waves of a social tide
that is flowing we know not whither.  Perhaps I am wrong, but I keep my
eyes open and their evidence makes me thoughtful.  The future is
inscrutable but appalling; you must stand by me.  When I can no longer
restrain and control, I will no longer lead."

"The League is nothing," said Moret, "but a small anarchist group, who
have thrown in their lot, for the present, with us.  You are the
indispensable leader of the party; you have created the agitation, and
it is in your hands to stimulate or allay it.  There are no unknown
forces; you are the motive power."

Savrola walked to the window.  "Look out over the city," he said.  "It
is a great mass of buildings; three hundred thousand people live there.
Consider its size; think of the latent potentialities it contains, and
then look at this small room.  Do you think I am what I am, because I
have changed all those minds, or because I best express their views?
Am I their master or their slave?  Believe me, I have no illusions, nor
need you."

His manner impressed his follower.  It almost seemed to him, as he
watched the city and listened to Savrola's earnest words, that he heard
the roar of a multitude, distant, subdued, but intense as the thunder
of the surf upon a rocky coast when the wind is off the sea.  He did
not reply.  His highly wrought temperament exaggerated every mood and
passion; he always lived in the superlative.  He had no counterpoise of
healthy cynicism.  Now he was very solemn, and bidding Savrola
good-morning, walked slowly down the stairs, swayed by the vibrations
of a powerful imagination which had been stimulated to an extreme.

Savrola lay back in his chair.  His first inclination was to laugh, but
he realised that his mirth would not be entirely at Moret's expense.
He had tried to trick himself as well, but the parts of that subtle
brain were too intimately connected to have secrets from one another.
Still he would not allow them to formulate the true reason of his
change of mind.  It was not so, he said to himself several times, and
even if it were it was of no importance and signified nothing.  He took
a cigarette from his case, and lighting it, watched the coiling rings
of smoke.

How much of what he had said had he believed?  He thought of Moret's
serious face; that was not entirely produced by his influence.  The
young revolutionist had noticed something too, but had feared, or
failed, to reduce his impressions to words.  There was an undercurrent
then; there were many dangers ahead.  Well, he did not care; he was
confident in his own powers.  As the difficulties arose, he would meet
them; when dangers threatened he would overcome them.  Horse, foot, and
artillery, he was a man, a complete entity.  Under any circumstances,
in any situation he knew himself a factor to be reckoned with; whatever
the game, he would play it to his amusement, if not to his advantage.

The smoke of his cigarette curled round his head.  Life,--how unreal,
how barren, and yet, how fascinating!  Fools, calling themselves
philosophers, had tried to bring home the bitter fact to men.  His
philosophy lent itself to a pious fraud--taught him to minimise the
importance of his pains, and to magnify that of his pleasures; made
life delightful and death incidental.  Zeno had shown him how to face
adversity, and Epicurus how to enjoy pleasure.  He basked in the smiles
of fortune, and shrugged his shoulders at the frowns of fate.  His
existence, or series of existences, had been agreeable.  All that he
remembered had been worth living.  If there was a future state, if the
game was to begin again elsewhere, he would take a hand.  He hoped for
immortality, but he contemplated annihilation with composure.
Meanwhile the business of living was an interesting problem.  His
speech,--he had made many and knew that nothing good can be obtained
without effort.  These impromptu feats of oratory existed only in the
minds of the listeners; the flowers of rhetoric were hothouse plants.

What was there to say?  Successive cigarettes had been mechanically
consumed.  Amid the smoke he saw a peroration, which would cut deep
into the hearts of a crowd; a high thought, a fine simile, expressed in
that correct diction which is comprehensible even to the most
illiterate, and appeals to the most simple; something to lift their
minds from the material cares of life and to awake sentiment.  His
ideas began to take the form of words, to group themselves into
sentences; he murmured to himself; the rhythm of his own language
swayed him; instinctively he alliterated.  Ideas succeeded one another,
as a stream flows swiftly by and the light changes on its waters.  He
seized a piece of paper and began hurriedly to pencil notes.  That was
a point; could not tautology accentuate it?  He scribbled down a rough
sentence, scratched it out, polished it, and wrote it in again.  The
sound would please their ears, the sense improve and stimulate their
minds.  What a game it was!  His brain contained the cards he had to
play, the world the stakes he played for.

As he worked, the hours passed away.  The housekeeper entering with his
luncheon found him silent and busy; she had seen him thus before and
did not venture to interrupt him.  The untasted food grew cold upon the
table, as the hands of the clock moved slowly round marking the
measured tread of time.  Presently he rose, and, completely under the
influence of his own thoughts and language, began to pace the room with
short rapid strides, speaking to himself in a low voice and with great
emphasis.  Suddenly he stopped, and with a strange violence his hand
descended on the table.  It was the end of the speech.

The noise recalled him to the commonplaces of life.  He was hungry and
tired, and with a laugh at his own enthusiasm sat down at the table and
began his neglected luncheon.

A dozen sheets of note paper, covered with phrases, facts, and figures,
were the result of the morning's work.  They lay pinned together on the
table, harmless insignificant pieces of paper; and yet Antonio Molara,
President of the Republic of Laurania, would have feared a bombshell
less.  Nor would he have been either a fool or a coward.




CHAPTER VII.

THE STATE BALL.

The palace of Laurania was admirably suited to the discharge of the
social ceremonies of the State.  The lavish expenditure on public
entertainments, which the constitutional practice encouraged, allowed
the hospitalities of the Republic to be extended upon the most
magnificent scale.  The opening State Ball of the season was in many
ways the most important of these affairs.  It was at this function that
the great men of both parties met, for the first time after the summer
heats, before the autumn session, and the brilliant society of the
capital reunited after their absence in their country and mountain
villas.  Taste, elegance, and magnificence were equally displayed.  The
finest music, the best champagne, the most diverse, yet select, company
were among the attractions of the evening.  The spacious courtyard of
the palace was completely covered by a gigantic awning.  Rows of the
Infantry of the Guard lined the approaches, and with their bright steel
bayonets increased the splendour and the security of the occasion.  The
well-lit streets were crowded with the curious populace.  The great
hall of the palace, at all times imposing and magnificent, displayed a
greater pomp when filled with a gaily dressed company.

At the head of the stairs stood the President and his wife, he
resplendent in his orders and medals, she in her matchless beauty.  As
the guests ascended, an aide-de-camp, a gorgeous thing in crimson and
gold, inquired their names and styles and announced them.  Many and
various was the company; every capital in Europe, every country in the
world, was represented.

The guest of the evening was the King of Ethiopia, a mass of silk and
jewels framing a black but vivacious face.  He came early,--unwisely
as, had he come later, there would have been a better audience to watch
his arrival; however, to his untutored mind perhaps this was a matter
of little importance.

The Diplomatic Corps followed in a long succession.  Coach after coach
drew up at the entrance and discharged its burden of polite astuteness,
clothed in every conceivable combination of gold and colour.  Arrived
at the top of the stairs, the Russian Ambassador, grey but gallant,
paused and, bowing with a stately courtesy, kissed the hand Lucile
extended.

"The scene is an appropriate setting to a peerless diamond," he
murmured.

"Would it sparkle as brightly in the Winter Palace?" inquired Lucile
lightly.

"Assuredly the frosty nights of Russia would intensify its brilliancy."

"Among so many others it would be lost."

"Among all others it would be unrivalled and alone."

"Ah," she said, "I hate publicity, and as for solitude, frosty
solitude, the thought of it alone makes me shiver."

She laughed.  The diplomatist threw her a look of admiration, and
stepping into the crowd, that already blocked the head of the stairs,
received and returned the congratulations of his numerous friends.

"Madame Tranta," said the aide-de-camp.

"I am so glad to see you," said Lucile.  "What a pity your daughter
could not come; it has been a great disappointment to many."

The ugly old woman thus addressed beamed with delight, and moving up
the stairs pushed her way to the marble balustrade of the balcony.  She
watched the later arrivals, and commented freely to her acquaintance on
their dresses and deportments; she also gave a little information about
each one, which would have been ill-natured even had it not been
untrue; but though she told her friends many things, she did not
mention that she had had to make Tranta write and threaten to desert
the President's party unless she was asked to the ball, and that even
this had failed to procure an invitation for her daughter, an
unfortunate girl who added a bad complexion to the family features.

Louvet came next, looking anxiously at the crowd of faces which gazed
from the landing, and imagining bombs and daggers at every step.  He
regarded Lucile with apprehension, but her smile seemed to give him
courage and he mingled with the throng.

Then Sir Richard Shalgrove, the British Ambassador, whose genial and
cheery face displayed an innocence which contrasted with his
reputation, advanced to make his bow.  The strained relations between
Laurania and Great Britain seemed to disappear in that comprehensive
salutation.  Lucile engaged him for a moment in conversation; she
pretended to know little or nothing.  "And when," she asked merrily,
"do we declare war?"

"Not until after I have had the pleasure of the third waltz, I hope,"
said the Ambassador.

"How annoying!  I wanted so much to dance it with you."

"And you will not?" he asked in great concern.

"Dare I plunge two nations into war for the sake of a waltz?"

"Had you my inducement you would not hesitate," he replied gallantly.

"What, to precipitate hostilities!  What have we done?  What is your
great inducement to fight?"

"Not to fight,--to dance," said Sir Richard with a little less than his
usual assurance.

"For a diplomatist you are indeed explicit.  While you are in so good a
mood, tell me what has happened; is there danger?"

"Danger?  No--how could there be?"  He selected a formula: "Between
traditionally friendly powers arbitration settles all disputes."

"You realise," she said earnestly and with an entire change of manner,
"that we have to consider the political situation here?  A strong
despatch improves the position of the Government."

"I have felt all through," said the Ambassador uncompromisingly, "that
there was no danger."  He did not however mention that H.M. battleship
_Aggressor_ (12,000 tons displacement and 14,000 horse power, armed
with four 11-inch guns) was steaming eighteen knots an hour towards the
African port of the Lauranian Republic, or that he himself had been
busy all the afternoon with cipher telegrams relating to ships, stores,
and military movements.  He thought that would be only boring her with
purely technical details.

While this conversation had been taking place, the stream of people had
passed continuously up the stairs, and the throng on the wide balcony
that ran round the entire hall had become dense.  The wonderful band
was almost drowned by the hum of conversation; the perfect floor of the
ball-room was only occupied by a few young couples whose own affairs
absorbed their minds and excluded all other interests.  A feeling of
expectancy pervaded the hall; the rumour that Savrola would come had
spread far and wide throughout Laurania.

Suddenly everyone became hushed, and above the strains of the band the
distant sound of shouting was heard.  Louder and louder it swelled,
swiftly approaching until it was at the very gate; then it died away,
and there was a silence through the hall filled only by the music.  Had
he been hooted or cheered?  The sound had seemed strangely ambiguous;
men were prepared to wager about it; his face would tell them the
answer.

The swing-doors opened and Savrola entered.  All eyes were turned on
him, but his face showed them nothing, and the bets remained undecided.
As he leisurely ascended the stairs, his eye travelled with interest
round the crowded galleries and the brilliant throng who lined them.
No decorations, no orders, no star relieved the plain evening dress he
wore.  Amid that blaze of colour, that multitude of gorgeous uniforms,
he appeared a sombre figure; but, like the Iron Duke in Paris, he
looked the leader of them all, calm, confident, and composed.

The President walked down a few steps to meet his distinguished guest.
Both bowed with grave dignity.

"I am glad you have come, Sir," said Molara; "it is in harmony with the
traditions of the State."

"Duty and inclination combined to point the way," answered Savrola with
a smile marked by a suggestion of irony.

"You had no difficulty with the crowd?" suggested the President acidly.

"Oh, no difficulty, but they take politics a little seriously; they
disapproved of my coming to your palace."

"You are right to come," said Molara.  "Now we who are engaged in
matters of State know what these things are worth; men of the world do
not get excited over public affairs, nor do gentlemen fight with
bludgeons."

"I prefer swords," said Savrola reflectively.  He had reached the head
of the stairs and Lucile stood before him.  What a queen she looked,
how peerless and incomparable among all women!  The fine tiara she wore
suggested sovereignty, and democrat as he was, he bowed to that alone.
She held out her hand; he took it with reverence and courtesy, but the
contact thrilled him.

The President selected a fat but famous woman from the aristocracy of
Laurania, and led the way into the ball-room.  Savrola did not dance;
there were some amusements which his philosophy taught him to despise.
Lucile was captured by the Russian Ambassador, and he remained a
spectator.

Lieutenant Tiro saw him thus alone and approached him, wishing to
finish their discussion about the "back" of the polo team, which had
been interrupted the week before.  Savrola received him with a smile;
he liked the young soldier, as indeed did everyone.  Tiro was full of
arguments; he was in favour of a strong heavy player who should lie
back in the game and take no chances.  Savrola, having remarked on the
importance of the Lauranian Army being properly represented in an
international contest, favoured a light weight, playing right up to his
forwards and ready to take the ball on himself at any moment.  It was
an animated discussion.

"Where have you played?" asked the Subaltern, surprised at his
knowledge.

"I have never played the game," answered Savrola; "but I have always
thought it a good training for military officers."

The subject was changed.

"Explain to me," said the great Democrat, "what all these different
orders are.  What is that blue one that Sir Richard, the British
Ambassador, is wearing?"

"That is the Garter," replied the Subaltern; "the most honourable order
in England."

"Really, and what is this that you are wearing?"

"I!  Oh, that's the African medal.  I was out there in '86 and '87, you
know."  As Savrola had anticipated, he was intensely pleased at being
asked.

"It must have been a strange experience for you, who are so young."

"It was damned good fun," said the Subaltern with decision.  "I was at
Langi Tal.  My squadron had a five-mile pursuit.  The lance is a
beautiful weapon.  The English in India have a sport called
pig-sticking; I have never tried it, but I know a better."

"Well, you may have another chance soon.  We seem to be getting into
difficulties with the British Government."

"Do you think there is any chance of war?" asked the boy eagerly.

"Well, of course," said Savrola, "a war would distract the attention of
the people from internal agitation and the Reform movement.  The
President is a clever man.  There might be war.  I should not care to
prophesy; but do you wish for it?"

"Certainly I do; it is my profession.  I am sick of being a lap-dog in
this palace; I long for the camp and the saddle again.  Besides, these
English will be worth fighting; they will give us a gallop all right.
There was one of their officers with me at Langi Tal, a subaltern; he
came as a spectator searching for adventure."

"What happened to him?"

"Well, you know, we pursued the enemy all the way to the hills and
played the devil with them.  As we were galloping along, he saw a lot
making off towards a wood, and wanted to cut them off.  I said there
wasn't time; he laid me six to four there was, so I sent a troop,--I
was in command of the squadron that day--you know.  He went with them
and showed them the way straight enough,--but I bore you?"

"On the contrary, I am greatly interested; what then?"

"He was wrong; the enemy got to the wood first and picked him off in
the open.  Our fellows brought him back, shot through the big artery of
the leg; that doesn't take long, you know.  All he said was: 'Well,
you've won, but how the deuce you'll get paid, I can't think.  Ask my
brother,--Royal Lancers.'"

"And then?" asked Savrola.

"Well, I couldn't find the artery to compress it, and none of the
doctors were about.  He died,--a gallant fellow!"

The Subaltern paused, rather ashamed at having talked so much about his
military adventures.  Savrola felt as if he had looked into a new
world, a world of ardent, reckless, warlike youth.  He was himself
young enough to feel a certain jealousy.  This boy had seen what he had
not; he possessed an experience which taught him lessons Savrola had
never learned.  Their lives had been different; but one day perhaps he
would open this strange book of war, and by the vivid light of personal
danger read the lessons it contained.

Meanwhile the dances had succeeded each other and the night was
passing.  The King of Ethiopia, horrified at the low dresses of the
unveiled women and dreading the prospect of eating with odious white
people, had taken his departure.  The President, approaching Savrola,
invited him to take his wife down to supper; a procession was formed;
he offered Lucile his arm and they descended the stairs.  The supper
was excellent: the champagne was dry and the quails fat.  A profusion
of rare and beautiful orchids covered the table; Savrola's surroundings
were agreeable, and he sat next the most beautiful woman in Laurania,
who, though he did not know it, was exerting herself to captivate him.
At first they talked amusing frivolities.  The President, whose manners
were refined, showed himself a pleasant companion and an accomplished
talker.  Savrola, who delighted in sparkling conversation, found it
difficult to keep to the part of a purely official visitor which he had
determined to observe.  The influence of wit, wine, and beauty were
combined to break his reserve; before he knew it, he had joined in a
discussion, one of those half cynical, half serious discussions which
are characteristic of an age which inquires because it doubts, and
doubts the more because it has inquired.

The Russian Ambassador had said that he worshipped beauty, and had told
his partner, the youthful Countess of Ferrol, that he regarded taking
her into dinner as a religious observance.

"I suppose that means you are bored," she replied.

"By no means; in my religion the ceremonies are never dull; that is one
of the principal advantages I claim for it."

"There are few others," said Molara; "you devote yourself to an idol of
your own creation.  If you worship beauty, your goddess stands on no
surer pedestal than human caprice.  Is it not so, Princess?"

The Princess of Tarentum, who was on the President's right, replied
that even that foundation was more secure than that on which many
beliefs repose.

"You mean that in your own case human caprice has been sufficiently
constant?  I can well believe it."

"No," she said; "I only mean that the love of beauty is common to all
human beings."

"To all living things," corrected Savrola.  "It is the love of the
plant that produces the flower."

"Ah," said the President, "but, though the love of beauty may be
constant, beauty itself may change.  Look how everything changes: the
beauty of one age is not the beauty of the next; what is admired in
Africa is hideous in Europe.  It is all a matter of opinion, local
opinion.  Your goddess, Monsieur, has as many shapes as Proteus."

"I like change," said the Ambassador.  "I regard variability of form as
a decided advantage in a goddess.  I do not care how many shapes I look
at, so long as all are beautiful."

"But," interposed Lucile, "you make no distinction between what is
beautiful and what we think is beautiful."

"There is none," said the President.

"In Her Excellency's case there would be none," interposed the
Ambassador politely.

"What is beauty," said Molara, "but what we choose to admire?"

"Do we choose?  Have we the power?" asked Savrola.

"Certainly," answered the President; "and every year we alter our
decisions; every year the fashion changes.  Ask the ladies.  Look at
the fashions of thirty years ago; they were thought becoming then.
Observe the different styles of painting that have succeeded each
other, or of poetry, or of music.  Besides, Monsieur de Stranoff's
goddess, though beautiful to him, might not be so to another."

"I regard that also as a real advantage; you make me more enamoured
with my religion each moment.  I do not worship my ideals for the
_reclamé_," said the Ambassador with a smile.

"You look at the question from a material point of view."

"Material rather than moral," said Lady Ferrol.

"But in the spirit-worship of my goddess the immorality is immaterial.
Besides, if you say that our tastes are always changing, it seems to me
that constancy is the essence of my religion."

"That is a paradox which we shall make you explain," said Molara.

"Well, you say I change each day, and my goddess changes too.  To-day I
admire one standard of beauty, to-morrow another, but when to-morrow
comes I am no longer the same person.  The molecular structure of my
brain is altered; my ideas have changed; my old self has perished,
loving its own ideal; the renovated _ego_ starts life with a new one.
It is all a case of wedded till death."

"You are not going to declare that constancy is a series of changes?
You may as well assert that motion is a succession of halts."

"I am true to the fancy of the hour."

"You express my views in other words.  Beauty depends on human caprice,
and changes with the times."

"Look at that statue," said Savrola suddenly, indicating a magnificent
marble figure of Diana which stood in the middle of the room surrounded
by ferns.  "More than two thousand years have passed since men called
that beautiful.  Do we deny it now?"  There was no answer and he
continued: "That is true beauty of line and form, which is eternal.
The other things you have mentioned, fashions, styles, fancies, are but
the unsuccessful efforts we make to attain to it.  Men call such
efforts art.  Art is to beauty what honour is to honesty, an unnatural
allotropic form.  Art and honour belong to gentlemen; beauty and
honesty are good enough for men."

There was a pause.  It was impossible to mistake the democratic tone;
his earnestness impressed them.  Molara looked uneasy.  The Ambassador
came to the rescue.

"Well, I shall continue to worship the goddess of beauty, whether she
be constant or variable"--he looked at the Countess; "and to show my
devotion I shall offer up a waltz in that sacred fane, the ball-room."

He pushed his chair back, and, stooping, picked up his partner's glove,
which had fallen to the floor.  Everyone rose, and the party separated.
As Savrola walked back to the hall with Lucile, they passed an open
doorway leading to the garden.  A multitude of fairy lights marked out
the flower-beds or hung in festoons from the trees.  The paths were
carpeted with red cloth; a cool breeze fanned their faces.  Lucile
paused.

"It is a lovely night."

The invitation was plain.  She had wanted to speak to him, then, after
all.  How right he was to come,--on constitutional grounds.

"Shall we go out?" he said.

She consented, and they stepped on to the terrace.




CHAPTER VIII.

"IN THE STARLIGHT."

The night was very still.  The soft breeze was not strong enough to
stir even the slender palms which rose on all sides, and whose
outlines, above the surrounding foliage, framed the starlit sky.  The
palace stood on high ground, and the garden sloped on the western side
towards the sea.  At the end of the terrace was a stone seat.

"Let us sit here," said Lucile.

They sat down.  The dreamy music of a waltz floated down as a distant
accompaniment to their thoughts.  The windows of the palace blazed with
light and suggested glitter, glare, and heat; in the garden all was
quiet and cool.

"Why do you sneer at honour?" asked Lucile, thinking of the interrupted
conversation.

"Because it has no true foundation, no ultra-human sanction.  Its codes
are constantly changing with times and places.  At one time it is
thought more honourable to kill the man you have wronged than to make
amends; at another it is more important to pay a bookmaker than a
butcher.  Like art it changes with human caprice, and like art it comes
from opulence and luxury."

"But why do you claim a higher origin for beauty and honesty?"

"Because, wherever I have looked, I see that all things are perpetually
referred to an eternal standard of fitness, and that right triumphs
over wrong, truth over falsehood, beauty over ugliness.  _Fitness_ is
the general expression!  Judged by this standard art and honour have
little value."

"But are these things so?" she asked wonderingly.  "Surely there are
many exceptions?"

"Nature never considers the individual; she only looks at the average
fitness of the species.  Consider the statistics of mortality.  How
exact they are: they give to a month the expectation of life to men;
and yet they tell a man nothing.  We cannot say that a good man will
always overcome a knave; but the evolutionist will not hesitate to
affirm that the nation with the highest ideals would succeed."

"Unless," said Lucile, "some other nation with lower ideals, but
stronger arms, intervenes."

"Well, even then might is a form of fitness; I think a low form, but
still physical force contains the elements of human progress.  This is
only the instance; we must enlarge our view.  Nature does not consider
the individual species.  All we will now assert is that organisms
imbued with moral fitness would ultimately rise above those whose
virtue is physical.  How many times has civilisation, by which I mean a
state of society where moral force begins to escape from the tyranny of
physical forces, climbed the ladder of Progress and been dragged down?
Perhaps many hundred times in this world alone.  But the motive power,
the upward tendency, was constant.  Evolution does not say 'always,'
but 'ultimately.'  Well, ultimately civilisation has climbed up beyond
the reach of barbarism.  The higher ideals have reached the surface by
superior buoyancy."

"Why do you assume that this triumph is permanent?  How do you know
that it will not be reversed, as all others have been?"

"Because we have got might on our side, as well as moral ascendancy."

"Perhaps the Romans in the summit of their power thought that too?"

"Very likely, but without reason.  They had only their swords to fall
back upon as an ultimate appeal; and when they became effete they could
no longer wield them."

"And modern civilisation?"

"Ah, we have other weapons.  When we have degenerated, as we must
eventually degenerate, when we have lost our intrinsic superiority, and
other races, according to the natural law, advance to take our place,
we shall fall back upon these weapons.  Our morals will be gone, but
our Maxims will remain.  The effete and trembling European will sweep
from the earth by scientific machinery the valiant savages who assail
him."

"Is that the triumph of moral superiority?"

"At first it would be, for the virtues of civilisation are of a higher
type than those of barbarism.  Kindness is better than courage, and
charity more than strength.  But ultimately the dominant race will
degenerate, and as there will be none to take its place, the
degeneration must continue.  It is the old struggle between vitality
and decay, between energy and indolence; a struggle that always ends in
silence.  After all, we could not expect human developement to be
constant.  It is only a question of time before the planet becomes
unfitted to support life on its surface."

"But you said that fitness must ultimately triumph."

"Over relative unfitness, yes.  But decay will involve all, victors and
vanquished.  The fire of life will die out, the spirit of vitality
become extinct."

"In this world perhaps."

"In every world.  All the universe is cooling--dying, that is,--and as
it cools, life for a spell becomes possible on the surface of its
spheres, and plays strange antics.  And then the end comes; the
universe dies and is sepulchred in the cold darkness of ultimate
negation."

"To what purpose then are all our efforts?"

"God knows," said Savrola cynically; "but I can imagine that the drama
would not be an uninteresting one to watch."

"And yet you believe in an ultra-human foundation, an eternal ideal for
such things as beauty and virtue."

"I believe that the superiority of fitness over relative unfitness is
one of the great laws of matter.  I include all kinds of
fitness,--moral, physical, mathematical."

"Mathematical!"

"Certainly; words only exist by conforming to correct mathematical
principles.  That is one of the great proofs we have that mathematics
have been discovered, not invented.  The planets observe a regular
progression in their distances from the sun.  Evolution suggests that
those that did not observe such principles were destroyed by collisions
and amalgamated with others.  It is a universal survival of the
fittest."  She was silent.  He continued: "Now let us say that in the
beginning there existed two factors, matter animated by the will to
live, and the eternal ideal; the great author and the great critic.  It
is to the interplay and counter-action of these two that all
developement, that all forms of life are due.  The more the expression
of the will to live approximates to the eternal standard of fitness,
the better it succeeds."

"I would add a third," she said; "a great Being to instil into all
forms of life the desire to attain to the ideal; to teach them in what
ways they may succeed."

"It is pleasant," he replied, "to think that such a Being exists to
approve our victories, to cheer our struggles, and to light our way;
but it is not scientifically or logically necessary to assume one after
the two factors I have spoken of are once at work."

"Surely the knowledge that such an ultra-human ideal existed must have
been given from without."

"No; that instinct which we call conscience was derived as all other
knowledge from experience."

"How could it be?"

"I think of it in this way.  When the human race was emerging from the
darkness of its origin and half animal, half human creatures trod the
earth, there was no idea of justice, honesty, or virtue, only the
motive power which we may call the 'will to live.'  Then perhaps it was
a minor peculiarity of some of these early ancestors of man to combine
in twos and threes for their mutual protection.  The first alliance was
made; the combinations prospered where the isolated individuals failed.
The faculty of combination appeared to be an element of fitness.  By
natural selection only the combinations survived.  Thus man became a
social animal.  Gradually the little societies became larger ones.
From families to tribes, and from tribes to nations the species
advanced, always finding that the better they combined, the better they
succeeded.  Now on what did this system of alliance depend?  It
depended on the members keeping faith with each other, on the practice
of honesty, justice, and the rest of the virtues.  Only those beings in
whom such faculties were present were able to combine, and thus only
the relatively honest men were preserved.  The process repeated itself
countless times during untold ages.  At every step the race advanced,
and at every step the realisation of the cause increased.  Honesty and
justice are bound up in our compositions and form an inseparable part
of our natures.  It is only with difficulty that we repress such
awkward inclinations."

"You do not then believe in God?"

"I never said that," said Savrola.  "I am only discussing the question
of our existence from one standpoint, that of reason.  There are many
who think that reason and faith, science and religion, must be
everlastingly separated, and that if one be admitted the other must be
denied.  Perhaps it is because we see so short a span, that we think
that their lines are parallel and never touch each other.  I always
cherish the hope that somewhere in the perspective of the future there
may be a vanishing point where all lines of human aspiration will
ultimately meet."

"And you believe all this that you have said?"

"No," he answered, "there is no faith in disbelief, whatever the poets
have said.  Before we can solve the problems of existence we must
establish the fact that we exist at all.  It is a strange riddle, is it
not?"

"We shall learn the answer when we die."

"If I thought that," said Savrola, "I should kill myself to-night out
of irresistible curiosity."

He paused, and looked up at the stars, which shone so brightly
overhead.  She followed his gaze.  "You like the stars?" she asked.

"I love them," he replied; "they are very beautiful."

"Perhaps your fate is written there."

"I have always admired the audacity of man in thinking that a Supreme
Power should placard the skies with the details of his squalid future,
and that his marriage, his misfortunes, and his crimes should be
written in letters of suns on the background of limitless space.  We
are consequential atoms."

"You think we are of no importance?"

"Life is very cheap.  Nature has no exaggerated idea of its value.  I
realise my own insignificance, but I am a philosophic microbe, and it
rather adds to my amusement than otherwise.  Insignificant or not, I
like living, it is good to think of the future."

"Ah," said Lucile impetuously, "whither are you hurrying us in the
future,--to revolution?"

"Perhaps," said Savrola calmly.

"You are prepared to plunge the country in a civil war?"

"Well, I hope it will not come to that extreme.  Probably there will be
some street-fighting and some people will be killed, but----"

"But why should you drive them like this?"

"I discharge a duty to the human species in breaking down a military
despotism.  I do not like to see a Government supported only by
bayonets; it is an anachronism."

"The Government is just and firm; it maintains law and order.  Why
should you assail it merely because it does not harmonise with your
theories?"

"My theories!" said Savrola.  "Is that the name you give to the lines
of soldiers with loaded rifles that guard this palace, or to the
Lancers I saw spearing the people in the square a week ago?"

His voice had grown strangely vehement and his manner thrilled her.
"You will ruin us," she said weakly.

"No," he replied with his grand air, "you can never be ruined.  Your
brilliancy and beauty will always make you the luckiest of women, and
your husband the luckiest of men."

His great soul was above the suspicion of presumption.  She looked up
at him, smiled quickly, and impulsively held out her hand.  "We are on
opposite sides, but we will fight under the rules of war.  I hope we
shall remain friends even though----"

"We are officially enemies," said Savrola, completing the sentence, and
taking her hand in his he bowed and kissed it.  After that they were
both very silent, and walking along the terrace re-entered the palace.
Most of the guests had already gone, and Savrola did not ascend the
stairs, but passing through the swing-doors took his departure.  Lucile
walked up to the ball-room in which a few youthful and indefatigable
couples were still circling.  Molara met her.  "My dear," he said,
"where have you been all this time?"

"In the garden," she replied.

"With Savrola?"

"Yes."

The President repressed a feeling of satisfaction.  "Did he tell you
anything?" he asked.

"Nothing," she answered, remembering for the first time the object with
which she had sought the interview; "I must see him again."

"You will continue to try and find out his political intentions?"
inquired Molara anxiously.

"I shall see him again," she replied.

"I trust to your wit," said the President; "you can do it, if anyone
can, my dearest."

The last dance came to an end and the last guest departed.  Very weary
and thoughtful Lucile retired to her room.  Her conversation with
Savrola filled her mind; his earnestness, his enthusiasm, his hopes,
his beliefs, or, rather, his disbeliefs, all passed again in review
before her.  What a great man he was!  Was it wonderful the people
followed him?  She would like to hear him speak to-morrow.

Her maid came in to assist her to undress.  She had looked from an
upper balcony and had seen Savrola.  "Was that," she asked her mistress
curiously, "the great Agitator?"  Her brother was going to hear him
make his speech to-morrow.

"Is he going to make a speech to-morrow?" asked Lucile.

"So my brother says," said the maid; "he says that he is going to give
them such a dressing down they will never forget it."  The maid paid
great attention to her brother's words.  There was much sympathy
between them; in fact she only called him her brother because it
sounded better.

Lucile took up the evening paper which lay on the bed.  There on the
first page was the announcement, the great meeting would take place at
the City-Hall at eight the next evening.  She dismissed the maid and
walked to the window.  The silent city lay before her; to-morrow the
man she had talked with would convulse that city with excitement.  She
would go and hear him; women went to these meetings; why should she not
go, closely veiled?  After all it would enable her to learn something
of his character and she could thus better assist her husband.  With
this reflection, which was extremely comforting, she went to bed.

The President was going up-stairs, when Miguel met him.  "More
business?" he asked wearily.

"No," said the Secretary; "things are going on very well."

Molara looked at him with quick annoyance; but Miguel's face remained
impassive, so he simply replied, "I am glad of that," and passed on.




CHAPTER IX.

THE ADMIRAL.

The disapproval which Moret had expressed at Savrola's determination to
go to the State Ball was amply justified by the result.  Every paper,
except those actually controlled by the party organisation, commented
severely or contemptuously on his action.  THE HOUR alluded to the
groans with which the crowd had received him, as marking the decline of
his influence with the masses and the break-up of the Revolutionary
party.  It also reminded its readers that social distinction was always
the highest ambition of the Demagogue, and declared that, by accepting
the President's invitation, Savrola had revealed "his sordid personal
aims."  The other Government organs expressed a similar opinion in an
even more offensive manner.  "These agitators," said THE COURTIER,
"have at all times in the history of the world hankered after titles
and honours, and the prospect of mixing with persons of rank and
fashion has once again proved irresistible to an austere and unbending
son of the people."  This superior vulgarity, though more unpleasant,
was less dangerous than the grave and serious warnings and protests
which the Democratic journals contained.  THE RISING TIDE said plainly
that, if this sort of thing continued, the Popular party would have to
find another leader, "One who did not cringe to power nor seek to
ingratiate himself with fashion."

Savrola read these criticisms with disdain.  He had recognised the fact
that such things would be said, and had deliberately exposed himself to
them.  He knew he had been unwise to go: he had known that from the
first; and yet somehow he did not regret his mistake.  After all, why
should his party dictate to him how he should rule his private life?
He would never resign his right to go where he pleased.  In this case
he had followed his own inclination, and the odium which had been cast
upon him was the price he was prepared to pay.  When he thought of his
conversation in the garden, he did not feel that he had made a bad
bargain.  The damage however must be repaired.  He looked over the
notes of his speech again, polished his sentences, considered his
points, collected his arguments, and made some additions which he
thought appropriate to the altered state of public feeling.

In this occupation the morning passed.  Moret came in to luncheon.  He
refrained from actually saying "I told you so," but his looks showed
that he felt his judgment was for the future established on unshakable
foundations.  His was a character easily elated or depressed.  Now he
was gloomy and despondent, regarding the cause as already lost.  Only a
forlorn hope remained; Savrola might express his regret at the meeting,
and appeal to the people to remember his former services.  He suggested
this to his leader, who laughed merrily at the idea.  "My dear Louis,"
he said, "I shall do nothing of the sort.  I will never resign my own
independence; I shall always go where I like and do what I like, and if
they are not pleased, they can find someone else to discharge their
public business."  Moret shuddered.  Savrola continued: "I shall not
actually tell them so, but my manner will show them that I fear their
reproaches as little as Molara's enmity."

"Perhaps they will not listen; I hear reports that there will be some
hostility."

"Oh, I shall make them listen.  There may be some howling at first, but
they will change their note before I have gone very far."

His confidence was contagious.  Moret's spirits revived under its
influence and that of a bottle of excellent claret.  Like Napoleon the
Third, he felt that all might yet be regained.

Meanwhile the President was extremely well satisfied with the first
result of his schemes.  He had not foreseen that Savrola's acceptance
of the invitation to the ball would involve him in so much
unpopularity, and, although it was a poor compliment to himself, it was
an unexpected advantage.  Besides, as Miguel had remarked, everything
was going on very well in other directions.  He had hardened his heart
and dismissed his scruples; stern, bitter necessity had thrust him on
an unpleasant course, but now that he had started he was determined to
go on.  In the meantime affairs pressed on all sides.  The British
Government were displaying an attitude of resolution on the African
Question.  His violent despatch had not settled the matter, as he had
hoped and even anticipated; it had become necessary to supplement his
words by actions.  The African port must not be left undefended; the
fleet must go there at once.  It was not a moment when he could well
afford to be without the five ships of war whose presence in the
harbour overawed many of the discontented; but he felt that a vigorous
foreign policy would be popular, or at least sufficiently interesting
to keep the public mind from domestic agitation.  He also knew that a
disaster abroad would precipitate a revolution at home.  It was
necessary to be very careful.  He recognised the power and resources of
Great Britain; he had no illusions on the subject of the comparative
weakness of Laurania.  In that indeed lay their only strength.  The
British Government would do all in their power to avoid fighting
(bullying, polite Europe would call it) so small a State.  It was a
game of bluff; the further he could go, the better for the situation at
home, but one step too far meant ruin.  It was a delicate game to play,
and it taxed to the utmost the energies and talents of a strong, able
man.

"The Admiral is here, Your Excellency," said Miguel entering the room,
followed immediately by a short, red-faced man in naval uniform.

"Good-morning, my dear de Mello," cried the President, rising and
shaking the newcomer's hand with great cordiality.  "I have got some
sailing-orders for you at last."

"Well," said de Mello bluntly, "I am sick of lying up waiting for your
agitators to rise."

"There is work of a difficult and exciting nature before you.  Where's
that translation of the cipher telegram, Miguel?  Ah, thank you,--look
here, Admiral."

The sailor read the paper, and whistled significantly.  "It may go
further than you wish, Molara, this time," he said unceremoniously.

"I shall place the matter in your hands; you will be able to save this
situation, as you have saved so many others."

"Where did this come from?" asked de Mello.

"From French sources."

"She is a powerful ship, the _Aggressor_,--latest design, newest guns,
in fact all the modern improvements; I have nothing that she could not
sink in ten minutes; besides, there are some gunboats there as well."

"I know the situation is difficult," said the President; "that is why I
am entrusting it to you!  Now listen; whatever happens I don't want
fighting; that would only end in disaster; and you know what disaster
would mean here.  You must argue and parley and protest on every point,
and cause as much delay as possible.  Consult me by telegraph on every
occasion, and try to make friends with the English admiral; that is
half the battle.  If it ever comes to a question of bombardment, we
shall give in and protest again.  I will have your instructions
forwarded to you in writing this evening.  You had better steam
to-night.  You understand the game?"

"Yes," said de Mello, "I have played it before."  He shook hands and
walked to the door.

The President accompanied him.  "It is possible," he said earnestly,
"that I shall want you back here before you have gone very far; there
are many signs of trouble in the city, and after all Strelitz is still
on the frontier waiting for a chance.  If I send for you, you will
come?"  There was almost an appealing note in his tone.

"Come?" said the Admiral.  "Of course I will come,--full steam ahead.
I have had my big gun trained on the Parliament House for the last
month, and I mean to let it off one day.  Oh, you can trust the fleet."

"Thank God I never doubted that," said the President with some emotion,
and shaking de Mello's hand warmly, he returned to his writing-table.
He felt that the Admiral was thoroughly loyal to the Government.

These men who live their lives in great machines, become involved in
the mechanism themselves.  De Mello had lived on warships all his days,
and neither knew nor cared for anything else.  Landsmen and civilians
he despised with a supreme professional contempt.  Such parts of the
world as bordered on the sea, he regarded as possible targets of
different types; for the rest he cared nothing.  With equal interest he
would burst his shells on patriots struggling to be free or foreign
enemies, on a hostile fort or on his native town.  As long as the
authority to fire reached him through the proper channel, he was
content; after that he regarded the question from a purely technical
standpoint.

The afternoon was far advanced before the President finished the varied
labours of his office.  "There is a great meeting to-night, is there
not?" he asked Miguel.

"Yes," said the Secretary, "in the City-Hall; Savrola is going to
speak."

"Have you arranged about an opposition?"

"Some of the secret police are going to make a little, I believe;
Colonel Sorrento has arranged that.  But I fancy Señor Savrola's party
are rather displeased with him, as it is."

"Ah," said Molara, "I know his powers; he will tear their very hearts
out with his words.  He is a terrible force; we must take every
precaution.  I suppose the troops have been ordered to be under arms?
There is nothing he cannot do with a crowd,--curse him!"

"The Colonel was here this morning; he told me he was making
arrangements."

"It is good," said the President; "he knows his own safety is involved.
Where do I dine to-night?"

"With Señor Louvet, at the Home Office, an official dinner."

"How detestable!  Still he has a plain cook and he will be worth
watching to-night.  He gets in such a state of terror when Savrola
holds forth that he is ridiculous.  I hate cowards, but they make the
world the merrier."

He bade the Secretary good-night and left the room.  Outside he met
Lucile.  "Dearest," he said, "I am dining out to-night, an official
dinner at Louvet's.  It is a nuisance, but I must go.  Perhaps I shall
not be back till late.  I am sorry to leave you like this, but in these
busy days I can hardly call my soul my own."

"Never mind, Antonio," she replied; "I know how you are pressed with
work.  What has happened about the English affair?"

"I don't like the situation at all," said Molara.  "They have a Jingo
Government in power and have sent ships as an answer to our note.  It
is most unfortunate.  Now I have to send the fleet away,--at such a
moment."  He groaned moodily.

"I told Sir Richard that we had to think of the situation here, and
that the despatch was meant for domestic purposes," said Lucile.

"I think," said the President, "that the English Government also have
to keep the electorate amused.  It is a Conservative ministry; they
must keep things going abroad to divert the public mind from advanced
legislation.  What, more still, Miguel?"

"Yes, Sir; this bag has just arrived, with several important despatches
which require your immediate attention."

The President looked for a moment as if he would like to tell Miguel to
take himself and his despatches to the infernal regions; but he
repressed the inclination.  "Good, I will come.  I shall see you at
breakfast to-morrow, my dear, till then, farewell," and giving her a
weary smile he walked off.

Thus it is that great men enjoy the power they risk their lives to gain
and often meet their deaths to hold.

Lucile was left alone, not for the first time when she had wanted
companionship and sympathy.  She was conscious of an unsatisfactory
sensation with regard to existence generally.  It was one of those
moments when the prizes and penalties of life seem equally stale and
futile.  She sought refuge in excitement.  The project she had
conceived the night before began to take actual shape in her mind; yes,
she would hear him speak.  Going to her room she rang the bell.  The
maid came quickly.  "What time is the meeting to-night?"

"At eight, Your Excellency," said the girl.

"You have a ticket for it?"

"Yes, my brother----"

"Well, give it to me; I want to hear this man speak.  He will attack
the Government; I must be there to report to the President."

The maid looked astonished, but gave up the ticket meekly.  For six
years she had been Lucile's maid, and was devoted to her young and
beautiful mistress.  "What will Your Excellency wear?" was her only
remark.

"Something dark, with a thick veil," said Lucile.  "Don't speak of this
to anyone."

"Oh no, Your Ex----"

"Not even to your brother."

"Oh, no, Your Excellency."

"Say I have a headache and have gone to bed.  You must go to your room
yourself."

The maid hurried off to get the dress and bonnet.  Lucile felt full of
the nervous excitement her resolve had raised.  It was an adventure, it
would be an experience, more than that, she would see him.  The
crowd,--when she thought of them she felt a little frightened, but then
she remembered that women frequently went to these demonstrations, and
there would be plenty of police to keep order.  She dressed herself
hastily in the clothes that the maid brought, and descending the
stairs, entered the garden.  It was already dusk, but Lucile had no
difficulty in finding her way to a small private gate in the wall,
which her key unlocked.

She stepped into the street.  All was very quiet.  The gas lamps flared
in a long double row till they almost met in the distant perspective.
A few people were hurrying in the direction of the City-Hall.  She
followed them.




CHAPTER X.

THE WAND OF THE MAGICIAN.

The City-Hall was a gigantic meeting-house in which for many years all
the public discussions of the Lauranian people had taken place.  Its
stone façade was showy and pretentious, but the building itself
consisted merely of the great hall and of a few smaller rooms and
offices.  The hall was capable of holding nearly seven thousand people;
with its white-washed roof sustained by iron girders, and well lit with
gas, it served its purpose well without any affectation of display.

Lucile was caught in the stream of those who were entering and carried
inside.  She had expected to find a seat, but, in view of a great
crowd, all the chairs had been removed from the body of the hall, and
only standing room remained.  In this solid mass of humanity she found
herself an atom.  To move was difficult; to go back almost impossible.

It was a striking scene.  The hall, which was hung with flags, was
crowded to overflowing; a long gallery, which ran round three sides,
was densely packed to the very ceiling; the flaring gas-jets threw
their yellow light on thousands of faces.  The large majority of the
audience were men, but Lucile noticed with relief that there were
several women present.  A platform at the far end of the hall displayed
the customary table and the inevitable glass of water.  In front of the
platform were two long rows of reporters, getting their pads and
pencils ready,--a kind of orchestra.  Behind and above were again rows
and rows of chairs filled by the numerous delegates, officials, and
secretaries of the various political clubs and organisations, each
distinguished by the badge and sash of his society.  Moret had exerted
himself to whip up the utmost power of the Party, and had certainly
succeeded in organising the greatest demonstration Laurania had ever
seen.  All the political forces arrayed against the Government were
represented.

There was a loud hum of conversation, broken at intervals by cheers and
the choruses of patriotic songs.  Suddenly the clock in the tower of
the building chimed the hour.  At the same instant, from a doorway on
the right of the platform, Savrola entered, followed by Godoy, Moret,
Renos, and several other prominent leaders of the movement.  He made
his way along the row of chairs, until he reached that on the right of
the table, sat down and looked quietly about him.  There was a storm of
discordant shouting, no two men seeming to hold the same opinion.  At
one moment it sounded as if all were cheering; at another hoots and
groans obtained the supremacy.  The meeting in fact was about equally
divided.  The extreme sections of the Reform' Party, regarding
Savrola's attendance at the ball as an action of the grossest
treachery, howled with fury at him; the more moderate cheered him as
the safest man to cling to in times of civil disturbance.  The
delegates and regular officials, who occupied the chairs on the
platform, were silent and sullen, like men who await an explanation
without belief in its sufficiency.

At length the shouting ceased.  Godoy, who was in the chair, rose and
made a short speech, in which he studiously avoided any contentious
allusion to Savrola, confining himself only to the progress of the
movement.  He spoke well and clearly, but nobody wanted to hear him,
and all were relieved when he concluded by calling upon "our leader,"
Savrola, to address the meeting.  Savrola, who had been talking
unconcernedly with one of the delegates on his right, turned round
quickly towards the audience, and rose.  As he did so, a man in a blue
suit, one of a little group similarly clad, shouted out, "Traitor and
toady!"  Hundreds of voices took up the cry; there was an outburst of
hooting and groaning; others cheered half-heartedly.  It was an
unpromising reception.  Moret looked around him in blank despair.

In spite of the heat and the pressure, Lucile could not take her eyes
off Savrola.  She could see that he was quivering with suppressed
excitement.  His composure had merely been assumed; crowds stirred his
blood, and when he rose he could wear his mask no longer.  He looked
almost terrible, as he waited there, facing the outburst with defiance
written in every line of his pale, earnest face and resolute figure.
Then he began to speak, but his words could not at first be
distinguished through the persistent shouts of the man in blue and his
friends.  At length, after five minutes of intense disorder, the
curiosity of the audience triumphed over all other emotions, and they
generally sank into silence, to hear what their leader had to say.

Again Savrola began.  Though he spoke very quietly and slowly, his
words reached the furthest ends of the hall.  He showed, or perhaps he
feigned, some nervousness at first, and here and there in his sentences
he paused as if searching for a word.  He was surprised, he said, at
his reception.  He had not expected, now when the final result was so
nearly attained, that the people of Laurania would change their minds.
The man in blue began to howl his odious cry.  There was another
outbreak of hooting; but the majority of the audience were now anxious
to listen, and silence was soon restored.  Savrola continued.  He
briefly reviewed the events of the last year: the struggle they had had
to form a party at all; the fierce opposition they had encountered and
sustained; the success that had attended their threat of taking arms;
the President's promise of a free Parliament; the trick that had been
played on them; the firing of the soldiery on the crowd.  His earnest,
thoughtful words evoked a hum of approval.  These were events in which
the audience had participated, and they liked having them recalled to
their memories.

Then he went on to speak of the Deputation and of the contempt with
which the President had thought fit to treat the accredited
representatives of the citizens.  "Traitor and toady!" shouted the man
in blue loudly; but there was no response.  "And," said Savrola, "I
will invite your attention to this further matter.  It has not been
sufficient to strangle the Press, to shoot down the people, and to
subvert the Constitution, but even when we are assembled here in
accordance with our unquestioned right to discuss matters of State and
decide upon our public policies, our deliberations are to be
interrupted by the paid agents of the Government,"--he looked towards
the man in blue, and there was an angry hum--"who insult by their
abusive cries not only myself, a free Lauranian, but you also, the
assembled citizens who have invited me to place my views before you."
Here the audience broke out into indignant applause and agreement;
cries of "Shame!" were heard, and fierce looks turned in the direction
of the interrupters, who had, however, dispersed themselves
unobtrusively among the crowd.  "In spite of such tactics," Savrola
continued, "and in the face of all opposition, whether by bribes or
bullets, whether by hired bravos or a merciless and mercenary soldiery,
the great cause we are here to support has gone on, is going on, and is
going to go on, until at length our ancient liberties are regained, and
those who have robbed us of them punished."  Loud cheers rose from all
parts of the hall.  His voice was even and not loud, but his words
conveyed an impression of dauntless resolution.

And then, having got his audience in hand, he turned his powers of
ridicule upon the President and his colleagues.  Every point he made
was received with cheers and laughter.  He spoke of Louvet, of his
courage, and of his trust in the people.  Perhaps, he said, it was not
inappropriate that the Ministry of the Interior should be filled by "a
glutton," the Home Office by a "stay-at-home" who was afraid to go out
among his countrymen at night.  Louvet was indeed a good object for
abuse; he was hated by the people, who despised his cowardice and had
always jeered at him.  Savrola continued.  He described the President
as clinging to office at whatever cost to himself or others.  In order
to draw the attention of the people from his tyrannical actions and
despotic government at home, he had tried to involve them in
complications abroad, and he had succeeded, more completely than he had
bargained for.  They were embroiled now in a dispute with a great
Power, a dispute from which they had nothing to gain and everything to
lose.  Their fleets and armies must be despatched, to the cost of the
State; their possessions were endangered; perhaps the lives of their
soldiers and sailors would be sacrificed.  And all for what?  In order
that Antonio Molara might do as he had declared he would, and die at
the head of the State.  It was a bad joke.  But he should be warned;
many a true word was spoken in jest.  Again there was a fierce hum.

Lucile listened spell-bound.  When he had risen, amid the groans and
hisses of that great crowd, she had sympathised with him, had feared
even for his life, had wondered at the strange courage which made him
attempt the seemingly impossible task of convincing such an audience.
As he had progressed and had begun to gain power and approval, she had
rejoiced; every cheer had given her pleasure.  She had silently joined
in the indignation which the crowd had expressed against Sorrento's
police-agents.  Now he was attacking her husband; and yet she hardly
seemed to feel an emotion of antagonism.

He left the subject of the Ministers with contemptuous scorn, amid the
earnest assent of the audience and on the full tide of public opinion.
They must now, he said, treat of higher matters.  He invited them to
consider the ideals at which they aimed.  Having roused their tempers,
he withheld from them the outburst of fury and enthusiasm they desired.
As he spoke of the hopes of happiness to which even the most miserable
of human beings had a right, silence reigned throughout the hall,
broken only by that grave melodious voice which appealed to everyone.
For more than three quarters of an hour he discussed social and
financial reforms.  Sound practical common sense was expressed with
many a happy instance, many a witty analogy, many a lofty and luminous
thought.

"When I look at this beautiful country that is ours and was our fathers
before us, at its blue seas and snow-capped mountains, at its
comfortable hamlets and wealthy cities, at its silver streams and
golden corn-fields, I marvel at the irony of fate which has struck
across so fair a prospect the dark shadow of a military despotism."

The sound of momentous resolution rose again from the crowded hall.  He
had held their enthusiasm back for an hour by the clock.  The steam had
been rising all this time.  All were searching in their minds for
something to relieve their feelings, to give expression to the
individual determination each man had made.  There was only one mind
throughout the hall.  His passions, his emotions, his very soul
appeared to be communicated to the seven thousand people who heard his
words; and they mutually inspired each other.

Then at last he let them go.  For the first time he raised his voice,
and in a resonant, powerful, penetrating tone which thrilled the
listeners, began the peroration of his speech.  The effect of his
change of manner was electrical.  Each short sentence was followed by
wild cheering.  The excitement of the audience became indescribable.
Everyone was carried away by it.  Lucile was borne along, unresisting,
by that strong torrent of enthusiasm; her interests, her objects, her
ambitions, her husband, all were forgotten.  His sentences grew longer,
more rolling and sonorous.  At length he reached the last of those
cumulative periods which pile argument on argument as Pelion on Ossa.
All pointed to an inevitable conclusion.  The people saw it coming and
when the last words fell, they were greeted with thunders of assent.

Then he sat down, drank some water, and pressed his hands to his head.
The strain had been terrific.  He was convulsed by his own emotions;
every pulse in his body was throbbing, every nerve quivering; he
streamed with perspiration and almost gasped for breath.  For five
minutes everyone shouted wildly; the delegates on the platform mounted
their chairs and waved their arms.  At his suggestion the great crowd
would have sallied into the streets and marched on the palace; and it
would have taken many bullets from the soldiers that Sorrento had so
carefully posted to bring them back to the realisation of the squalid
materialities of life.

The resolutions which Moret and Godoy proposed were carried by
acclamation.  Savrola turned to the former.  "Well, Louis, I was right.
How did it sound?  I liked the last words.  It is the best speech I
have ever made."

Moret looked at him as at a god.  "Splendid!" he said.  "You have saved
everything."

And now the meeting began to break up.  Savrola walked to a side-door,
and in a small waiting-room received the congratulations of all his
principal supporters and friends.  Lucile was hurried along in the
press.  Presently there was a block.  Two men, of foreign aspect, stood
in front of her, speaking in low tones.

"Brave words, Karl," said one.

"Ah," said the other, "we must have deeds.  He is a good tool to work
with at present; the time will come when we shall need something
sharper."

"He has great power."

"Yes, but he is not of us.  He has no sympathy with the cause.  What
does he care about a community of goods?"

"For my part," said the first man with an ugly laugh, "I have always
been more attracted by the idea of a community of wives."

"Well, that too is part of the great scheme of society."

"When you deal them out, Karl, put me down as part proprietor of the
President's."

He chuckled coarsely.  Lucile shuddered.  Here were the influences
behind and beneath the great Democrat of which her husband had spoken.

The human stream began to flow on again.  Lucile was carried by a
current down a side street which led to the doorway by which Savrola
would leave the hall.  A bright gas-lamp made everything plainly
visible.  At length he appeared at the top of the steps, at the foot of
which his carriage had already drawn up to receive him.  The narrow
street was filled with the crowd; the pressure was severe.

"Louis, come with me," said Savrola to Moret; "you can drop me and take
the carriage on."  Like many highly-wrought minds he yearned for
sympathy and praise at such a moment; and he knew he would get them
from Moret.

The throng, on seeing him, surged forward.  Lucile, carried off her
feet, was pushed into a dark burly man in front of her.  Chivalrous
gallantry is not among the peculiar characteristics of excited
democracy.  Without looking round the man jobbed backwards with his
elbow and struck her in the breast.  The pain was intense;
involuntarily she screamed.

"Gentlemen," cried Savrola, "a woman has been hurt; I heard her voice.
Give room there!"  He ran down the steps.  The crowd opened out.  A
dozen eager and officious hands were extended to assist Lucile, who was
paralysed with terror.  She would be recognised; the consequences were
too awful to be thought of.

"Bring her in here," said Savrola.  "Moret, help me."  He half carried,
half supported her up the steps into the small waiting-room.  Godoy,
Renos, and half a dozen of the Democratic leaders, who had been
discussing the speech, grouped themselves around her curiously.  He
placed her in a chair.  "A glass of water," he said quickly.  Somebody
handed him one, and he turned to offer it to her.  Lucile, incapable of
speech or motion, saw no way of escape.  He must recognise her.  The
ridicule, the taunts, the danger, all were plain to her.  As she made a
feeble effort with her hand to decline the water, Savrola looked hard
at her through her thick veil.  Suddenly he started, spilling the water
he was holding out to her.  He knew her then!  Now it would come--a
terrible exposure!

"Why, Mirette," he cried, "my little niece!  How could you come alone
to such a crowded place at night?  To hear my speech?  Godoy, Renos,
this is indeed a tribute!  This means more to me than all the cheers of
the people.  Here is my sister's daughter who has risked the crowd to
come and hear me speak.  But your mother," he turned to Lucile, "should
never have allowed you; this is no place for a girl alone.  I must take
you home.  You are not hurt?  If you had asked me, I could have ensured
a seat for you out of the crowd.  Is my carriage there?  Good, we had
better get home at once; your mother will be very anxious.  Good-night,
gentlemen.  Come, my dear."  He offered her his arm and led her down
the steps.  The people who filled the street, their upturned faces pale
in the gas-light, cheered wildly.  He put her into his carriage.
"Drive on, coachman," he said, getting in himself.

"Where to, Sir?" asked the man.

Moret advanced to the carriage.  "I will go on the box," he said.  "I
can take the carriage on after dropping you," and before Savrola could
say a word he had climbed on to the seat beside the driver.

"Where to, Sir?" repeated the coachman.

"Home," said Savrola desperately.

The carriage started, passed through the cheering crowds, and out into
the less frequented parts of the city.




CHAPTER XI.

IN THE WATCHES OF THE NIGHT.

Lucile lay back in the cushions of the brougham with a feeling of
intense relief.  He had saved her.  An emotion of gratitude filled her
mind, and on the impulse of the moment she took his hand and pressed
it.  It was the third time in their renewed acquaintance that their
hands had met, and each time the significance had been different.

Savrola smiled.  "It was most imprudent of your Excellency to venture
into a crowd like that.  Luckily I thought of an expedient in time.  I
trust you were not hurt in the throng?"

"No," said Lucile; "a man struck me with his elbow and I screamed.  I
should never have come."

"It was dangerous."

"I wanted to----"  She paused.

"To hear me speak," he added, finishing her sentence for her.

"Yes; to see you use your power."

"I am flattered by the interest you take in me."

"Oh, it was on purely political grounds."

There was the suspicion of a smile on her face.  He looked at her
quickly.  What did she mean?  Why should it be necessary to say so?
Her mind had contemplated another reason, then.

"I hope you were not bored," he said.

"It is terrible to have power like that," she replied earnestly; and
then after a pause, "Where are we going to?"

"I would have driven you to the palace," said Savrola, "but our
ingenuous young friend on the box has made it necessary that we should
keep up this farce for a little longer.  It will be necessary to get
rid of him.  For the present you had best remain my niece."

She looked up at him with an amused smile, and then said seriously: "It
was brilliant of you to have thought of it, and noble of you to have
carried it out.  I shall never forget it; you have done me a great
service."

"Here we are," said Savrola at length, as the brougham drew up at the
entrance of his house.  He opened the carriage-door; Moret jumped off
the box and rang the bell.  After a pause the old housekeeper opened
the door.  Savrola called to her.  "Ah, Bettine, I am glad you are up.
Here is my niece, who has been to the meeting to hear me speak and has
been jostled by the crowd.  I shall not let her go home alone to-night.
Have you a bedroom ready?"

"There is the spare room on the first floor," answered the old woman;
"but I fear that would never do."

"Why not?" asked Savrola quickly.

"Because the sheets for the big bed are not aired, and since the
chimney was swept there has been no fire there."

"Oh, well, you must try and do what you can.  Good-night, Moret.  Will
you send the carriage back as soon as you have done with it?  I have
some notes to send to THE RISING TIDE office about the articles for
to-morrow morning.  Don't forget,--as quickly as you can, for I am
tired out."

"Good-night," said Moret.  "You have made the finest speech of your
life.  Nothing can stop us while we have you to lead the way."

He got into the carriage and drove off.  Savrola and Lucile ascended
the stairs to the sitting-room, while the housekeeper bustled off to
make preparations for the airing of sheets and pillow-cases.  Lucile
looked round the room with interest and curiosity.  "I am in the heart
of the enemy's camp now," she said.

"You will be in many hearts during your life," said Savrola, "whether
you remain a queen or not."

"You are still determined to drive us out?"

"You heard what I said to-night."

"I ought to hate you," said Lucile; "and yet I don't feel that we are
enemies."

"We are on opposite sides," he replied.

"Only politics come between us."

"Politics and persons," he added significantly, using a hackneyed
phrase.

She looked at him with a startled glance.  What did he mean?  Had he
read deeper into her heart than she herself had dared to look?  "Where
does that door lead to?" she asked irrelevantly.

"That?  It leads to the roof,--to my observatory."

"Oh show it me," she cried.  "Is it there you watch the stars?"

"I often look at them.  I love them; they are full of suggestions and
ideas."

He unlocked the door and led the way up the narrow winding stairs on to
the platform.  It was, as is usual in Laurania, a delicious night.
Lucile walked to the parapet and looked over; all the lamps of the town
twinkled beneath, and above were the stars.

Suddenly, far out in the harbour, a broad white beam of light shot out;
it was the search-light of a warship.  For a moment it swept along the
military mole and rested on the battery at the mouth of the channel.
The fleet was leaving the port, and picking its way through the
difficult passage.

Savrola had been informed of the approaching departure of the admiral,
and realised at once the meaning of what he saw.  "That," he said, "may
precipitate matters."

"You mean that when the ships are gone you will no longer fear to rise?"

"I do not fear; but it is better to await a good moment."

"And that moment?"

"Is perhaps imminent.  I should like you to leave the capital.  It will
be no place for women in a few days.  Your husband knows it; why has he
not sent you away to the country?"

"Because," she replied, "we shall suppress this revolt, and punish
those who have caused it."

"Have no illusions," said Savrola.  "I do not miscalculate.  The army
cannot be trusted; the fleet is gone; the people are determined.  It
will not be safe for you to stay here."

"I will not be driven out," she answered with energy; "nothing shall
make me fly.  I will perish with my husband."

"Oh, we shall try to be much more prosaic than that," he said.  "We
shall offer a very handsome pension to the President, and he will
retire with his beautiful wife to some gay and peaceful city, where he
can enjoy life without depriving others of liberty."

"You think you can do all this?" she cried.  "Your power can rouse the
multitude; but can you restrain them?"  And she told him of the words
she had heard in the crowd that night.  "Are you not playing with
mighty forces?"

"Yes, I am," he said; "and that is why I have asked you to go away to
the country for a few days, until things become settled one way or the
other.  It is possible that either I or your husband will go down.  I
shall of course try to save him, if we are successful; but, as you say,
there are other forces which may be beyond control; and if he gets the
upper hand----"

"Well?"

"I suppose I should be shot."

"Fearful!" she said.  "Why will you persist?"

"Oh, it is only now, when the play is growing high, that I begin to
appreciate the game.  Besides, death is not very terrible."

"Afterwards may be."

"I do not think so.  Life, to continue, must show a balance of
happiness.  Of one thing I feel sure; we may say of a future
state,--'If any, then better.'"

"You apply your knowledge of this world to all others."

"Why not?" he said.  "Why should not the same laws hold good all over
the universe, and, if possible, beyond it?  Other suns show by their
spectra that they contain the same elements as ours."

"You put your faith in the stars," she said doubtingly, "and think,
though you will not admit it, they can tell you everything."

"I never accused them of being interested in our concerns; but if they
were, they might tell strange tales.  Supposing they could read our
hearts for instance?"

She glanced up and met his eye.  They looked at each other hard.  She
gasped; whatever the stars might know, they had read each other's
secret.

There was a noise of someone running up-stairs.  It was the housekeeper.

"The carriage has returned," said Savrola in a quiet voice.  "It can
now take you back to the palace."

The old woman stepped out on to the roof, breathing hard from her
climb.  "I have aired the sheets," she said with exultation in her
voice, "and the fire is burning brightly.  There is some soup ready for
the young lady, if she will come and take it, before it gets cold."

The interruption was so commonplace that both Lucile and Savrola
laughed.  It was a happy escape from an awkward moment.  "You always
manage, Bettine," he said, "to make everyone comfortable; but after all
the bedroom will not be needed.  My niece is afraid lest her mother be
alarmed at her absence, and I am going to send her back in the carriage
so soon as it returns."

The poor old soul looked terribly disappointed; the warm sheets, the
cosy fire, the hot soup were comforts she loved to prepare for others,
enjoying them, as it were, by proxy.  She turned away and descended the
narrow staircase mournfully, leaving them again alone.

So they sat and talked, not as before, but with full knowledge of their
sympathy, while the moon climbed higher in the sky and the soft breezes
stirred the foliage of the palm-trees in the garden below.  Neither
thought much of the future, nor did they blame the coachman's delay.

At length the silence of the night, and the train of their conversation
were broken by the noise of wheels on the stony street.

"At last," said Savrola without enthusiasm.  Lucile rose and looked
over the parapet.  A carriage approached almost at a gallop.  It
stopped suddenly at the door, and a man jumped out in a hurry.  The
door-bell rang loudly.

Savrola took both her hands.  "We must part," he said; "when shall we
meet again,--Lucile?"

She made no answer, nor did the moonlight betray the expression of her
features.  Savrola led the way down the stairs.  As he entered the
sitting-room, the further door was opened hastily by a man who, seeing
Savrola, stopped short, and respectfully took off his hat.  It was
Moret's servant.

With considerable presence of mind Savrola shut the door behind him,
leaving Lucile in the darkness of the staircase.  She waited in
astonishment; the door was thin.  "My master, Sir," said a stranger's
voice, "bade me bring you this with all speed and give it direct into
your hand."  There followed the tearing of paper, a pause, an
exclamation, and then Savrola, in a voice steady with the steadiness
which betrays intense emotion under control, replied: "Thank you very
much; say I shall await them here.  Don't take the carriage; go on
foot,--stay, I will let you out myself."

She heard the other door open and the sound of their footsteps going
down-stairs; then she turned the handle and entered.  Something had
happened, something sudden, unexpected, momentous.  His voice,--strange
how well she was beginning to know it!--had told her that.  An envelope
lay on the floor; on the table,--the table where the cigarette-box and
the revolver lay side by side,--was a paper, half curled up as if
anxious to preserve its secret.

Subtle, various, and complex are the springs of human action.  She felt
the paper touched her nearly; she knew it concerned him.  Their
interests were antagonistic; yet she did not know whether it was for
his sake or her own that she was impelled to indulge a wild curiosity.
She smoothed the paper out.  It was brief and in a hurried hand, but to
the point: _Code wire just received says, Strelitz crossed frontier
this morning with two thousand men and is marching hither via Turga and
Lorenzo.  The hour has come.  I have sent to Godoy and Renos and will
bring them round at once.  Yours through hell_, MORET.

Lucile felt the blood run to her heart; already she imagined the sound
of musketry.  It was true the hour had come.  The fatal paper
fascinated her; she could not take her eyes from it.  Suddenly the door
opened and Savrola came in.  The noise, her agitation, and above all
the sense of detection wrung from her a low, short, startled scream.
He grasped the situation immediately.  "Bluebeard," he said ironically.

"Treason," she retorted taking refuge in furious anger.  "So you will
rise and murder us in the night,--conspirator!"

Savrola smiled suavely; his composure was again perfect.  "I have sent
the messenger away on foot, and the carriage is at your disposal.  We
have talked long; it is now three o'clock; your Excellency should not
further delay your return to the palace.  It would be most imprudent;
besides, as you will realise, I expect visitors."

His calmness maddened her.  "Yes," she retorted; "the President will
send you some,--police."

"He will not know about the invasion yet."

"I shall tell him," she replied.

Savrola laughed softly.  "Oh no," he said, "that would not be fair."

"All's fair in love and war."

"And this----?"

"Is both," she said, and then burst into tears.

After that they went down-stairs.  Savrola helped her into the
carriage.  "Good-night," he said, though it was already morning, "and
good-bye."

But Lucile, not knowing what to say or think or do, continued to cry
inconsolably and the carriage drove away.  Savrola closed the door and
returned to his room.  He did not feel his secret was in any danger.




CHAPTER XII.

A COUNCIL OF WAR.

Savrola had scarcely time to smoke a cigarette before the Revolutionary
leaders began to arrive.  Moret was the first; he rang the bell
violently, stamping about on the doorstep till it was answered, ran
upstairs three steps at a time, and burst impetuously into the room,
aquiver with excitement.  "Ah," he cried, "the hour has come,--not
words but deeds now!  We draw the sword in a good cause; for my part I
shall fling away the scabbard; Fortune is on our side."

"Yes," said Savrola; "have some whisky and soda-water,--on the
sideboard there.  It is a good drink to draw the sword on,--the best in
fact."

Moret somewhat abashed turned and walking to the table began opening a
soda-water bottle.  As he poured out the spirit the clinking of glass
and bottle betrayed his agitation.  Savrola laughed softly.  Turning
swiftly, his impetuous follower sought to hide his agitation by a fresh
outburst.  "I have told you throughout," he said, holding his glass on
high, "that force was the only solution.  It has come, as I predicted.
I drink to it,--war, civil war, battle, murder, and sudden death,--by
these means liberty will be regained!"

"Wonderful soothing effect these cigarettes have.  There's no opium in
them either,--soft, fresh Egyptians.  I get them every week from Cairo.
A little, old man I met there three years ago makes them,--Abdullah
Rachouan."

He held out the box.  Moret took one; the business of lighting it
steadied him; he sat down and began to smoke furiously.  Savrola
watched him in dreamy calmness, looking often at the smoke-wreathes
that rose about him.  Presently he spoke.  "So you are glad there is to
be war and that people are to be killed?"

"I am glad that this tyranny is to be ended."

"Remember that we pay for every pleasure and every triumph we have in
this world."

"I will take my chance."

"I trust, I would be glad if I could say with conviction, I pray, that
the lot may not fall on you.  But it is true nevertheless that we must
pay, and for all the good things in life men pay in advance.  The
principles of sound finance apply."

"How do you mean?" asked Moret.

"Would you rise in the world?  You must work while others amuse
themselves.  Are you desirous of a reputation for courage?  You must
risk your life.  Would you be strong morally or physically?  You must
resist temptations.  All this is paying in advance; that is prospective
finance.  Observe the other side of the picture; the bad things are
paid for afterwards."

"Not always."

"Yes, as surely as the headache of Sunday morning follows the debauch
of Saturday night, as an idle youth is requited by a barren age, as a
gluttonous appetite promotes an ungainly paunch."

"And you think I shall have to pay for this excitement and enthusiasm?
You think I have paid nothing so far?"

"You will have to take risks, that is paying.  Fate will often throw
double or quits.  But on these hazards men should not embark with
levity; the gentleman will always think of settling-day."

Moret was silent.  Brave and impetuous as he was, the conversation
chilled him.  His was not the courage of the Stoic; he had not schooled
himself to contemplate the shock of dissolution.  He fixed his thoughts
on the struggles and hopes of the world, as one might look at the
flowers and grasses that were growing on the edge of a precipice
towards which he was being impelled.

They remained for a few moments without speaking, till Godoy and Renos
entered, having arrived simultaneously.

Each man of the four had taken the news, which meant so much to them,
according to their natures.  Savrola had put on the armour of his
philosophy, and gazed on the world as from a distance.  Moret had been
convulsed with excitement.  The other two, neither composed nor elated
by the proximity and the approach of danger, showed that they were not
the men for stirring times.

Savrola greeted them amiably, and all sat down.  Renos was crushed.
The heavy hammer of action had fallen on the delicate structures of
precedent and technicality in which he had always trusted, and smashed
them flat.  Now that the crisis had arrived, the law, his shield and
buckler, was first of all to be thrown away.  "Why has he done this?"
he asked.  "What right had he to come without authorisation?  He has
committed us all.  What can we do?"

Godoy too was shocked and frightened.  He was one of those men who fear
danger, who shrink from it, but yet embark deliberately on courses
which they know must lead to it.  He had long foreseen the moment of
revolt, but had persisted in going on.  Now it was upon him, and he
trembled; still, his dignity strengthened him.

"What is to be done, Savrola?" he asked, turning instinctively to the
greater soul and stronger mind.

"Well," said the leader, "they had no business to come without my
orders; they have, as Renos has observed, committed us, while our plans
are in some respects incomplete.  Strelitz has disobeyed me flatly; I
will settle with him later.  For the present, recriminations are
futile; we have to deal with the situation.  The President will know of
the invasion in the morning; some of the troops here will, I take it,
be ordered to strengthen the Government forces in the field.  Perhaps
the Guard will be sent.  I think the others would refuse to march; they
are thoroughly in sympathy with the Cause.  If so we must strike, much
as we have arranged.  You, Moret, will call the people to arms.  The
Proclamation must be printed, the rifles served out, the Revolution
proclaimed.  All the Delegates must be notified.  If the soldiers
fraternise, all will be well; if not, you will have to fight--I don't
think there will be much opposition--storm the palace and make Molara
prisoner."

"It shall be done," said Moret.

"Meanwhile," continued Savrola, "we will proclaim the Provisional
Government at the Mayoralty.  Thence I shall send you orders; thither
you must send me reports.  All this will happen the day after
to-morrow."

Godoy shivered, but assented.  "Yes," he said; "it is the only course,
except flight and ruin."

"Very well; now we will go into details.  First of all, the
Proclamation.  I will write that to-night.  Moret, you must get it
printed; you shall have it at six o'clock to-morrow morning.  Then
prepare the arrangements we had devised for assembling and arming the
people; wait till you get a written order from me to put them into
action.  You, Renos, must see the members of the Provisional
Government.  Have the constitution of the Council of Public Safety
printed, and be ready to circulate it to-morrow night; yet again, wait
till I give the word.  Much depends on the attitude of the troops; but
everything is really ready.  I do not think we need fear the result."

The intricate details of the plot, for plot it was, were well known to
the leaders of the revolt.  For several months they had looked to force
as the only means of ending the government they detested.  Savrola was
not the man to commit himself to such an enterprise without taking
every precaution.  Nothing had been forgotten; the machinery of
revolution only needed setting in motion.  Yet in spite of the
elaborate nature of the conspiracy and its great scale, the President
and his police had been able to learn nothing definite.  They feared
that a rising was imminent; they had realised the danger for some
months; but it was impossible to know where the political agitation
ended, and the open sedition began.  The great social position and
almost European reputation of the principal leaders had rendered their
arrest without certain proof a matter of extreme difficulty.  The
President, believing that the people would not rise unless spurred
thereto by some act of power on the part of the Executive, feared to
rouse them.  But for this Savrola, Moret, and the others would have
already filled cells in the State Prison; indeed, they would have had
much to be thankful for had their lives been spared.

But Savrola understood his position, and had played his game with
consummate tact and skill.  The great parade he made of the political
agitation had prevented the President from observing the conspiracy to
deliberate violence which lay beneath.  At length the preparations were
approaching completion.  It had become only a matter of days;
Strelitz's impetuous act had but precipitated the course of events.
One corner of the great firework had caught light too soon; it was
necessary to fire the rest lest the effect should be spoiled.

He continued to go over the details of the scheme for nearly an hour,
to make sure that there should be no mistakes.  At last all was
finished, and the members of the embryo Council of Public Safety took
their departure.  Savrola let them out himself, not wishing to wake the
old nurse.  Poor soul, why should she feel the force of the struggles
of ambitious men?

Moret went off full of enthusiasm; the others were gloomy and
preoccupied.  Their great leader shut the door, and once more that
night climbed the stairs to his chamber.

As he reached it, the first streaks of morning came in through the
parted curtains of the windows.  The room, in the grey light with its
half-empty glasses and full ashtrays, looked like a woman, no longer
young, surprised by an unsympathetic dawn in the meretricious paints
and pomps of the previous night.  It was too late to go to bed; yet he
was tired, weary with that dry kind of fatigue which a man feels when
all desire of sleep has passed away.  He experienced a sensation of
annoyance and depression.  Life seemed unsatisfactory; something was
lacking.  When all deductions had been made on the scores of ambition,
duty, excitement, or fame, there remained an unabsorbed residuum of
pure emptiness.  What was the good of it all?  He thought of the silent
streets; in a few hours they would echo with the crackle of musketry.
Poor broken creatures would be carried bleeding to the houses, whose
doors terrified women would close in the uncharitable haste of fear.
Others, flicked out of human ken from solid concrete earth to unknown,
unformulated abstractions, would lie limp and reproachful on the
paving-stones.  And for what?  He could not find an answer to the
question.  The apology for his own actions was merged in the much
greater apology nature would have to make for the existence of the
human species.  Well, he might be killed himself; and as the thought
occurred to him he looked forward with a strange curiosity to that
sudden change, with perhaps its great revelation.  The reflection made
him less dissatisfied with the shallow ends of human ambition.  When
the notes of life ring false, men should correct them by referring to
the tuning-fork of death.  It is when that clear menacing tone is heard
that the love of life grows keenest in the human heart.

All men, from such moods and reflections, are recalled to earth by hard
matters of fact.  He remembered the proclamation he had to write, and
rising plunged into the numerous details of the business of living, and
thus forgot the barrenness of life.  So he sat and wrote, while the
pale glimmer of the dawn glowed into the clear light of sunrise and the
warm tints of broad day.




CHAPTER XIII.

THE ACTION OF THE EXECUTIVE.

The private breakfast-room of the Presidential palace was a small but
lofty apartment.  The walls were hung with tapestries; over the doors
weapons of ancient type and history were arranged in elaborate
patterns.  The great French windows were deeply set in the wall, and
the bright light of the morning was softened by heavy crimson curtains.
Like the rest of the house it wore an official aspect.  The windows
opened on to the stone terrace, and those who passed through them
experienced a feeling of relief in exchanging the severe splendours of
the palace for the beautiful confusion of the garden, where between the
spreading trees and slender palms the sparkling waters of the harbour
were displayed.

The table, which was set for two, was comfortably small and well
arranged.  The generous revenue which it had long been the principle of
the Lauranian Republic to bestow on her First Magistrate enabled the
President to live in a style of elegance and luxury, and to enjoy the
attractions of good silver, fresh-cut flowers, and an excellent cook.
But it was with a clouded brow that Molara met his wife at breakfast on
the morning after the events which have just been chronicled.

"Bad news,--tiresome news again, dear," he said as, sitting down and
depositing a handful of papers on the table, he signed to the servants
to leave the room.

Lucile experienced a feeling of intense relief.  After all she would
not have to tell him the secret she had learned.  "Has he started?" she
asked incautiously.

"Yes, last night; but he will be stopped."

"Thank heaven for that!"

Molara looked at her in amazement.

"What do you mean?  Why are you glad that the Admiral and the fleet are
prevented from carrying out my orders?"

"The fleet!"

"Good gracious!  What did you think I meant?" he asked impatiently.

A loophole of escape presented itself.  She ignored his question.  "I
am glad the fleet is stopped because I think they will be wanted here,
now that the city is so unsettled."

"Oh," said the President shortly,--suspiciously, she thought.  To cover
her retreat she asked a question.  "Why are they stopped?"

Molara pulled out a Press telegram slip from among his papers.

"_Port Said, September 9th, 6.0 a.m._," he said, reading; "_British
steam-collier Maude, 1,400 tons, grounded this morning in canal, which
is in consequence blocked for traffic.  Every effort is being made to
clear the fairway.  Accident is believed to be due to the silting up of
channel caused by extreme draught of H.B.M.S. Aggressor which passed
through last night._"  He added: "They know their business, these
English pigs."

"You think they have done it on purpose?"

"Of course."

"But the fleet is not there yet."

"It will be there to-morrow night."

"But why should they block the channel now,--why not wait?"

"Characteristic dislike of _coups de théâtre_, I suppose.  Now the
French would have waited till we were at the entrance of the channel,
and then shut the door in our faces neatly.  But British Diplomacy does
not aim at effects; besides, this looks more natural."

"How abominable!"

"And listen to this," said the President, as giving way to keen
irritation he snatched another paper from his bundle and began to read.
"From the Ambassador," he said: "_Her Majesty's Government have
instructed the officers commanding the various British coaling-stations
south of the Red Sea, to render every assistance to the Lauranian fleet
and to supply them with coal at the local market-rate_."

"It is an insult," she said.

"It is a cat playing with a mouse," he rejoined bitterly.

"What will you do?"

"Do?  Sulk, protest,--but give in.  What else can we do?  Their ships
are on the spot; ours are cut off."

There was a pause.  Molara read his papers and continued his breakfast.
Lucile came back to her resolution.  She would tell him; but she would
make terms.  Savrola must be protected at all costs.  "Antonio," she
said nervously.

The President, who was in a thoroughly bad temper, went on reading for
a moment and then looked up abruptly.  "Yes?"

"I must tell you something."

"Well, what is it?"

"A great danger is threatening us."

"I know that," he said shortly.

"Savrola----"  She paused uncertain and undecided.

"What of him?" said Molara, suddenly becoming interested.

"If you were to find him guilty of conspiracy, of plotting revolution,
what would you do?"

"I should shoot him with the greatest pleasure in the world."

"What, without a trial?"

"Oh no!  He should have a trial under martial law and welcome.  What of
him?"

It was a bad moment.  She looked round for another loophole.

"He--he made a speech last night," she said.

"He did," said the President impatiently.

"Well, I think it must have been very inflammatory, because I heard the
crowds cheering in the streets all night."

Molara looked at her in deep disgust.  "My dear, how silly you are this
morning," he said and returned to his paper.

The long silence that followed was broken by the hurried entrance of
Miguel with an opened telegram.  He walked straight up to the President
and handed it to him without speaking; but Lucile could see that he was
trembling with haste, excitement, or terror.

Molara opened the folded paper leisurely, smoothed it on the table and
then jumped out of his chair as he read it.  "Good God! when did this
come?"

"This moment."

"The fleet," he cried, "the fleet, Miguel,--not an instant must be
lost!  Recall the Admiral!  They must return at once.  I will write the
telegram myself."  Crumpling the message in his hand he hurried out of
the room, Miguel at his heels.  At the door he found a waiting servant.
"Send for Colonel Sorrento,--to come here immediately.  Go! be off!
Run!" he cried as the man departed with ceremonious slowness.

Lucile heard them bustle down the corridor and the slam of a distant
door; then all was silent again.  She knew what that telegram
contained.  The tragedy had burst upon them all, that tragedy whose
climax must strike her so nearly; but she felt glad she had meant to
tell her husband,--and yet more glad that she had not told him.  A
cynic might have observed that Savrola's confidence, in the safety of
his secret, was well founded.

She returned to her sitting-room.  The uncertainty of the immediate
future terrified her.  If the revolt succeeded, she and her husband
would have to fly for their lives; if it were suppressed the
consequences seemed more appalling.  One thing was clear: the President
would send her out of the capital at once to some place of safety.
Whither?  Amid all these doubts and conflicting emotions one desire
predominated,--to see Savrola again, to bid him good-bye, to tell him
she had not betrayed him.  It was impossible.  A prey to many
apprehensions she walked aimlessly about the room, awaiting the
developements she feared.

Meanwhile the President and his secretary had reached the private
office.  Miguel shut the door.  Both looked at each other.

"It has come," said Molara with a long breath.

"In an evil hour," replied the Secretary.

"I shall win, Miguel.  Trust to my star, my luck,--I will see this
thing through.  We shall crush them; but much is to be done.  Now write
this telegram to our agent at Port Said; send it in cipher and clear
the line: _Charter at once fast despatch-boat and go personally to meet
Admiral de Mello, who with fleet left Laurania midnight 8th instant for
Port Said.  Stop.  Order him in my name return here urgent.  Stop.
Spare no expense_.  Now send that off.  With good luck the ships should
be here to-morrow night."

Miguel sat down and began to put the message into code.  The President
paced the room excitedly; then he rang the bell; a servant entered.

"Has Colonel Sorrento come yet?"

"No, Your Excellency."

"Send and tell him to come at once."

"He has been sent for, Your Excellency."

"Send again."

The man disappeared.

Molara rang the bell once more.  He met the servant in the doorway.

"Is there a mounted orderly?"

"Yes, Your Excellency."

"Finished, Miguel?"

"Here," said the Secretary, getting up and handing the message to the
startled attendant,--"at speed."

"Go on," shouted the President, striking the table with his open hand,
and the man fled from the room.  The sound of the galloping horse
somewhat allayed Molara's impatience.

"He crossed the frontier last night at nine o'clock, Miguel; he should
have been at Turga at daybreak.  We have a garrison there, a small one,
but enough to delay the advance.  Why is there no news?  This telegram
comes from Paris, from the Foreign Minister.  We should have heard
from--who is it commands the post?"

"I don't know, Your Excellency.  The Colonel will be here directly; but
the silence is ugly."

The President set his teeth.  "I cannot trust the army; they are all
disaffected.  It is a terrible game; but I shall win, I shall win!"  He
repeated the sentence to himself several times with more energy than
conviction, as if to fortify his heart.

The door opened.  "Colonel Sorrento," announced the usher.

"Look here, old man," said Molara familiarly,--he felt he wanted a
friend rather than a subordinate--"Strelitz has invaded us.  He crossed
the frontier last night with two thousand men and several Maxim guns,
marching here by Turga and Lorenzo.  We have no news from the
Commandant at Turga; who is he?"

Sorrento was one of those soldiers, not an uncommon type, who fear
little but independent responsibility.  He had served under the
President for many years in the field and in the Government.  Had he
been alone when the news arrived, he would have been thunderstruck; now
that he had a leader he followed and obeyed with military precision.
Without any appearance of surprise he thought for a moment and then
replied: "Major de Roc.  He has four companies,--a good officer,--you
can trust him, Sir."

"But the troops?"

"That's another matter altogether.  The whole army, as I have several
times informed you, Sir, is disturbed.  Only the Guard can be relied
on, and, of course, the officers."

"Well, we shall see," said the President stoutly.  "Miguel, get the
map.  You know the country, Sorrento.  Between Turga and Lorenzo, the
Black Gorge must be held.  Here," he pointed on the map, which the
Secretary unrolled, "here they must be stopped or at any rate delayed,
till the fleet comes back.  What is there at Lorenzo?"

"A battalion and two machine-guns," replied the War-Minister.

The President took a turn up and down the room.  He was used to
deciding quickly.  "A brigade would do it for certain," he said.  He
took another turn.  "Rail two battalions of the Guard at once to
Lorenzo."  Sorrento, who had produced his note-book, began to write.
"Two field-batteries," said the President.  "Which two are fit,
Colonel?"

"The first and second will do," answered Sorrento.

"And the Lancers of the Guard."

"All?"

"Yes, all, except details for orderly-work."

"That leaves you only one trustworthy battalion."

"I know," said the President.  "It is a bold course, but the only one.
Now what about the Line regiments in the city?  Which are the worst?"

"The third, fifth, and eleventh have caused us most uneasiness."

"Very well; we will get them out of the way.  Let them march to-day
towards Lorenzo and halt anywhere ten miles out of the city as a
supporting brigade.  Now, who is to command?"

"Rollo is senior, Sir."

"A fool, a fossil, and out of date," cried the President.

"Stupid, but steady," said Sorrento.  "You can rely upon his attempting
nothing brilliant; he will do what he is told, and nothing more."

Molara reflected on this tremendous military virtue.  "Very well; give
him the supporting brigade; they will have no fighting.  But the other
business; that is different.  Brienz should have it."

"Why not Drogan?" suggested the War-Minister.

"I can't stand his wife," said the President.

"He is a good musician, Sir," interposed Miguel.

"Guitar,--very melodious."  He shook his head appreciatively.

"And has a capital cook," added Sorrento.

"No," said Molara; "this is a matter of life and death.  I cannot
indulge my prejudices, nor yours; he is not a good man."

"A good Staff would run him all right, Sir; he is very placid and
easily led.  And he is a great friend of mine; many's the good
dinner----"

"No, Colonel, it's no good; I cannot.  Is it likely that when so much
is at stake, when my reputation, my chances in life, indeed life
itself, are on the hazard, that I or any one would give a great command
on such grounds?  If claims were equally balanced, I would oblige you;
but Brienz is a better man and must have it.  Besides," he added, "he
has not got a horrid wife."  Sorrento looked terribly disappointed but
said no more.  "Well, that is all settled.  I leave all details to you.
The Staff, everything, you may appoint; but the troops must start by
noon.  I will speak to them myself at the station."

The War-Minister bowed and departed, solaced by the minor appointments
which the President had left to his decision.

Molara looked at his secretary dubiously.  "Is there anything else to
do?  None of the revolutionaries in the city have moved, have they?"

"They have given no sign, Sir; there is nothing to incriminate them."

"It is possible this has surprised them; their plans are not ready.  At
the first overt act of violence or sedition, I will arrest them.  But I
must have proofs, not for my own satisfaction, but for the country."

"This is a critical moment," said the Secretary.  "If the leaders of
the sedition could be discredited, if they could be made to appear
ridiculous or insincere, it would have a great effect on public
opinion."

"I had thought," replied Molara, "that we might hope to learn something
of their plans."

"You have informed me that Her Excellency has consented to ask Señor
Savrola for information on this point?"

"I dislike the idea of any intimacy between them; it might be
dangerous."

"It might be made most dangerous for him."

"In what way?"

"In the way I have already indicated to you, General."

"Do you mean in the way I forbade you to suggest, Sir?"

"Certainly."

"And this is the moment?"

"Now or never."

There was a silence, after which they resumed the morning's business.
For an hour and a half both worked busily.  Then Molara spoke.  "I hate
doing it; it's a dirty job."

"What is necessary, is necessary," said the Secretary sententiously.
The President was about to make a reply when a clerk entered the room
with a deciphered telegram.  Miguel took it from him, read it, and
passed it to his chief, saying grimly as he did so: "Perhaps this will
decide you."

The President read the message, and as he read his face grew hard and
cruel.  It was from the Police Commissary at Turga, brief but terrible;
the soldiers had deserted to the invaders, having first shot their
officers.

"Very well," said Molara at last, "I shall require you to accompany me
to-night on a mission of importance.  I will take an aide-de-camp as
well."

"Yes," said the Secretary; "witnesses are necessary."

"I shall be armed."

"That is desirable, but only as a threat, only as a threat," said the
Secretary earnestly.  "He is too strong for violence; the people would
be up in a moment."

"I know that," curtly replied the President, and then with savage
bitterness he added: "but for that there would be no difficulty."

"None whatever," said Miguel, and went on writing.

Molara rose and went in search of Lucile, choking down the disgust and
repugnance he felt.  He was determined now; it might just make the
difference to him in the struggle for power, and besides, it contained
the element of revenge.  He would like to see the proud Savrola grovel
and beg for mercy at his feet.  All mere politicians, he said to
himself, were physical cowards; the fear of death would paralyse his
rival.

Lucile was still in her sitting-room when her husband entered.  She met
him with an anxious look.  "What has happened, Antonio?"

"We have been invaded, dearest, by a large force of revolutionaries.
The garrison of Turga have deserted to the enemy, and killed their
officers.  The end is now in sight."

"It is terrible," she said.

"Lucile," he said with unwonted tenderness, "one chance remains.  If
you could find out what the leaders of the agitation in this city
intend to do, if you can get Savrola to show his hand, we might
maintain our position and overcome our enemies.  Can you,--will you do
this?"

Lucile's heart bounded.  It was, as he said, a chance.  She might
defeat the plot, and at the same time make terms for Savrola; she might
still rule in Laurania, and, though this thought she repressed, save
the man she loved.  Her course was clear; to obtain the information and
sell it to her husband for Savrola's life and liberty.  "I will try,"
she said.

"I knew you would not fail me, dearest," said Molara.  "But the time is
short; go and see him to-night at his rooms.  He will surely tell you.
You have power over men and will succeed."

Lucile reflected.  To herself she said, "I shall save the State and
serve my husband;" and herself rejoined, "You will see him again."
Then she spoke aloud.  "I will go to-night."

"My dear, I always trusted you," said the President; "I will never
forget your devotion."

Then he hurried away, convulsed with remorse,--and shame.  He had
indeed stooped to conquer.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE LOYALTY OF THE ARMY.

The military force of the Lauranian Republic was proportioned to the
duties of protecting its territories from invasion and of maintaining
law and order within them, but was by the wisdom of former days
restricted to limits which did not encourage great schemes of foreign
conquest nor any aggressive meddling in the affairs of the neighbouring
principalities.  Four regiments of cavalry, twenty battalions of foot,
and eight field-batteries comprised the Army of the Line.  Besides
these there was the Republican Guard, which consisted of a regiment of
Lancers and three strong battalions of veteran infantry and supported
by their discipline the authority, and by their magnificence the
dignity, of the State.

The great capital city, which exceeded in wealth, population, and
turbulence the aggregate of the provincial towns, had for its garrison
the Guard and half of the entire army.  The remaining troops were
scattered in small country stations and on the frontiers.

All the pains that the President had taken to maintain the good will of
the soldiery had proved vain.  The revolutionary movement had grown
apace in the ranks of the army, till they were now thoroughly
disaffected, and the officers felt that their orders would be obeyed
only so far as they were agreeable.  With the Guard it was different.
All, or nearly all, had borne their part in the late war and had
marched to victory under the generalship of the President.  They
honoured and trusted their former commander, and were in turn honoured
and trusted by him; indeed the favour he had shewn them may have been
among the causes which had alienated the rest.

It was the greater part of this Guard that Molara, in his heavy need,
was about to send against the invaders.  He well knew the danger of
depriving himself of the only troops he could rely on, should the city
itself rise; but the advancing forces must be stopped at all hazards,
and the Guard alone were able and willing to do the work.  He would be
left almost alone amid the populace who detested him, in the city he
had ruled so sternly, with mutinous soldiers as his only defenders.  It
was not an inviting prospect, yet it presented some chances of success.
It displayed a confidence which, though assumed, might decide the
waverers and disgust his foes; and it dealt with the most pressing
emergency, which was after all the first duty of the Executive.  He did
not doubt the ability of the troops he had despatched to disperse, if
not to destroy, the rabble that had crossed the frontier.  That danger
at least was removed by his action.  In two days the fleet would
return, and under its guns his Government might still continue, feared
and respected.  The intervening period was the crisis, a crisis which
he hoped to pass safely through, partly by the force of his
personality, and partly by the ridicule and contempt in which he
intended to plunge his terrible rival.

Punctually at eleven o'clock he left his private office to attire
himself in his full uniform as a general of the army, in order that at
the parade the troops might be reminded that he too was a soldier and
one who had seen much war.

At the door Lieutenant Tiro presented himself, in a great state of
perturbation.  "Sir," he said, "you will allow me to go with my
squadron to the front?  There will be nothing for me to do here."

"On the contrary," replied the President, "there will be a great deal
for you to do here.  You must stay."

Tiro turned pale.  "I do beg you, Sir, to allow me to go," he said
earnestly.

"Impossible,--I want you here."

"But, Sir----"

"Oh, I know," said Molara impatiently; "you want to get shot at.  Stay
here, and I promise you shall hear bullets in plenty before you have
done."  He turned away, but the look of bitter disappointment on the
young officer's face induced him to pause.  "Besides," he added,
assuming that charm of manner of which few great men are destitute, "I
require you for a service of difficulty and extreme danger.  You have
been specially selected."

The Subaltern said no more, but he was only half consoled.  He thought
ruefully of the green country, the glinting lances, the crack of the
rifles, and all the interest and joy of war.  He would miss everything;
his friends would be there, but he would not share their perils.  They
would talk of their adventures in after days and he would have no part
in their discussions; they would even laugh at him as a "tame cat" of
the palace, an aide-de-camp for ornamental purposes only.  And as he
mourned, a distant trumpet-call stung him like the cut of a whip.  It
was Boots and Saddles,--the Lancers of the Guard were turning out.  The
President hurried off to array himself, and Tiro descended the stairs
to order the horses.

Molara was soon ready, and joined his aide-de-camp on the steps of the
palace.  Attended by a small escort they rode to the railway-station,
passing, on the way, through groups of sullen citizens who stared
insolently, and even spat on the ground in hatred and anger.

The artillery had already been despatched, but the entraining of the
rest of the troops had not commenced when the President arrived, and
they were drawn up (the cavalry in mass, the infantry in line of
quarter-columns) in the open space in front of the terminus.  Colonel
Brienz, who commanded the force, was mounted at their head.  He
advanced and saluted; the band struck up the Republican Hymn, and the
infantry presented arms with a clash of precision.  The President
acknowledged these compliments with punctilious care; and then, as the
rifles were shouldered, he rode towards the ranks.

"You have a splendid force, Colonel Brienz," he said addressing the
Colonel, but speaking loud enough to be heard by the troops.  "To your
skill and to their courage the Republic entrusts its safety, and
entrusts it with confidence."  He then turned to the troops: "Soldiers,
some of you will remember the day I asked you to make a great effort
for your country and your honour; Sorato is the name that history has
given to the victory which was your answer to my appeal.  Since then we
have rested in peace and security, protected by the laurels that have
crowned your bayonets.  Now, as the years have passed, those trophies
are challenged, challenged by the rabble whose backs you have seen so
often.  Take off the old laurels, soldiers of the Guard, and with the
bare steel win new ones.  Once again I ask you to do great things, and
when I look along your ranks, I cannot doubt that you will do them.
Farewell, my heart goes with you; would to God I were your leader!"

He shook hands with Brienz and with the senior officers amid loud
cheers from the troops, some of whom broke from the ranks to press
around him, while others raised their helmets on their bayonets in
warlike enthusiasm.  But as the shouting ceased, a long, discordant
howl of derision, till then drowned by the noise, was heard from the
watching crowds,--a sinister comment!

Meanwhile at the other end of the town the mobilisation of the Reserve
Brigade revealed the extreme contrast between the loyalty and
discipline of the Guard and the disaffection of the regiments of the
Line.

An ominous silence reigned throughout the barracks.  The soldiers
walked about moodily and sullenly, making little attempt to pack their
kits for the impending march.  Some loitered in groups about the
parade-ground and under the colonnade which ran round their quarters;
others sat sulking on their cots.  The habit of discipline is hard to
break, but here were men steeling themselves to break it.

These signs did not pass unnoticed by the officers who awaited in
anxious suspense the hour of parade.

"Don't push them," Sorrento had said to the colonels, "take them very
gently;" and the colonels had severally replied that they would answer
with their lives for the loyalty of their men.  It was nevertheless
thought advisable to try the effect of the order upon a single
battalion, and the 11th Regiment was the first to receive the command
to turn out.

The bugles blew briskly and cheerily, and the officers, hitching up
their swords and pulling on their gloves, hurried to their respective
companies.  Would the men obey the summons?  It was touch and go.
Anxiously they waited.  Then by twos and threes the soldiers shuffled
out and began to form up in their ranks.  At length the companies were
complete, sufficiently complete, that is to say, for there were many
absentees.  The officers inspected their units.  It was a dirty parade;
the accoutrements were uncleaned, the uniforms carelessly put on, and
the general appearance of the men was slovenly to a degree.  But of
these things no notice was taken, and as they walked along the ranks
the subalterns found something to say in friendly chaff to many of
their soldiers.  They were greeted however with a forbidding silence, a
silence not produced by discipline or by respect.  Presently _Markers_
sounded, the companies moved to the general parade-ground, and soon the
whole battalion was drawn up in the middle of the barrack-square.

The Colonel was on his horse, faultlessly attired, and attended by his
Adjutant.  He looked calmly at the solid ranks before him, and nothing
in his bearing revealed the terrible suspense which filled his mind and
gripped his nerve.  The Adjutant cantered along the column collecting
the reports.  "All present, Sir," said the company commanders, but
there were several whose voices quavered.  Then he returned to the
Colonel, and fell into his place.  The Colonel looked at his regiment,
and the regiment at their Colonel.

"Battalion,--attention!" he cried, and the soldiers sprang up with a
clatter and a click.  "Form,--fours."

The word of command was loud and clear.  About a dozen soldiers moved
at the call of instinct--moved a little--looked about them, and
shuffled back to their places again.  The rest budged not an inch.  A
long and horrid silence followed.  The Colonel's face turned grey.

"Soldiers," he said, "I have given you an order; remember the honour of
the regiment.  Form,--fours."  This time not a man moved.  "As you
were," he shouted desperately, though it was an unnecessary command.
"The battalion will advance in quarter-column.  Quick march!"

The battalion remained motionless.

"Captain Lecomte," said the Colonel, "what is the name of the
right-hand man of your company?"

"Sergeant Balfe, Sir," replied the officer.

"Sergeant Balfe, I order you to advance.  Quick--march!"

The sergeant quivered with excitement; but he held his ground.

The Colonel opened his pouch and produced his revolver with much
deliberation.  He looked carefully at it, as if to see that it was well
cleaned; then he raised the hammer and rode up close to the mutineer.
At ten yards he stopped and took aim.  "Quick--march!" he said in a low
menacing voice.

It was evident that a climax had been reached, but at this instant
Sorrento, who, concealed in the archway of the barrack-gate, had
watched the proceedings, rode into the square and trotted towards the
soldiers.  The Colonel lowered his pistol.

"Good-morning," said the War-Minister.

The officer replaced his weapon and saluted.

"Is the regiment ready to move off?" and then before a reply could be
given he added: "A very smart parade, but after all it will not be
necessary to march to-day.  The President is anxious that the men
should have a good night's rest before starting, and," raising his
voice, "that they should drink a bumper to the Republic and confusion
to her enemies.  You may dismiss them, Colonel."

"Fall out," said the Colonel, not even caring to risk going through the
correct procedure for dismissing.

The parade broke up.  The ordered ranks dissolved in a crowd, and the
soldiers streamed off towards their barracks.  The officers alone
remained.

"I should have shot him, Sir, in another instant," said the Colonel.

"No good," said Sorrento, "to shoot one man; it would only infuriate
them.  I will have a couple of machine-guns down here to-morrow
morning, and we shall see then what will happen."

He turned suddenly, interrupted by a storm of broken and confused
cheering.  The soldiers had almost reached their barracks; one man was
raised on the shoulders of others, and surrounded by the rest of the
regiment, waving their helmets, brandishing their rifles, and cheering
wildly.

"It is the sergeant," said the Colonel.

"So I perceive," replied Sorrento bitterly.  "A popular man, I suppose.
Have you many non-commissioned officers like that?"  The Colonel made
no reply.  "Gentlemen," said the War-Minister to the officers who
loitered on the square, "I would recommend you to go to your quarters.
You are rather tempting targets here, and I believe your regiment is a
particularly good shooting regiment.  Is it not, Colonel?"

With which taunt he turned and rode away, sick at heart with anger and
anxiety, while the officers of the 11th Regiment of Lauranian Infantry
retired to their quarters to hide their shame and face their danger.




CHAPTER XV.

SURPRISES.

It had been a busy and exciting day for Savrola.  He had seen his
followers, had issued orders, restrained the impetuous, stimulated the
weak, encouraged the timid.  All day long messages and reports had
reached him about the behaviour of the soldiers.  The departure of the
Guard, and the refusal of the supporting brigade to march, were equally
pleasing events.  The conspiracy had now been made known to so many
persons that he doubted the possibility of keeping it much longer
secret from the Government agents.  From every consideration he felt
that the hour had come.  The whole of the elaborate plan that he had
devised had been put into execution.  The strain had been severe, but
at length all the preparations were completed, and the whole strength
of the Revolutionary party was concentrated for the final struggle.
Godoy, Renos, and the others were collected at the Mayoralty, whence at
dawn the Provisional Government was to be proclaimed.  Moret, to whom
the actual duty of calling the people to arms had been assigned,
instructed his agents at his own house and made arrangements for the
posting of the proclamation.  All was ready.  The leader on whom
everything depended, whose brain had conceived, whose heart had
inspired, the great conspiracy, lay back in his chair.  He needed and
desired a few moments' rest and quiet reflection to review his schemes,
to look for omissions, to brace his nerves.

A small bright fire burned in the grate, and all around were the ashes
of burnt papers.  For an hour he had been feeding the flames.  One
phase of his life was over; there might be another, but it was well to
have done with this one first.  Letters from friends, dead now or
alienated; letters of congratulation, of praise that had inspired his
younger ambitions; letters from brilliant men and some from beautiful
women,--all had met a common fate.  Why should these records, be
preserved for the curious eye of unsympathetic posterity?  If he
perished, the world might forget him, and welcome; if he lived, his
life would henceforth be within the province of the historian.  A
single note, preserved from the general destruction, lay on the table
beside him.  It was the one with which Lucile had accompanied her
invitation to the State Ball, the only one he had ever received from
her.

As he balanced it in his fingers, his thoughts drifted away from the
busy hard realities of life to that kindred soul and lovely face.  That
episode too was over.  A barrier stood between them.  Whatever the
result of the revolt, she was lost to him, unless--and that terrible
unless was pregnant with suggestions of such awful wickedness that his
mind recoiled from it as a man's hand starts from some filthy thing he
has by inadvertence touched.  There were sins, sins against the
commonwealth of mankind, against the phenomenon of life itself, the
stigma of which would cling through death, and for which there was
pardon only in annihilation.  Yet he hated Molara with a fierce hatred;
nor did he care to longer hide from himself the reason.  And with the
recollection of the reason his mind reverted to a softer mood.  Would
he ever see her again?  Even the sound of her name pleased him;
"Lucile," he whispered sadly.

There was a quick step outside; the door opened, and she stood before
him.  He sprang up in mute astonishment.

Lucile looked greatly embarrassed.  Her mission was a delicate one.
Indeed she did not know her own mind, or did not care to know it.  It
was for her husband's sake, she said to herself; but the words she
spoke belied her.  "I have come to tell you that I did not betray your
secret."

"I know,--I never feared," replied Savrola.

"How do you know?"

"I have not yet been arrested."

"No, but he suspects."

"Suspects what?"

"That you are conspiring against the Republic."

"Oh!" said Savrola, greatly relieved; "he has no proofs."

"To-morrow he may have."

"To-morrow will be too late."

"Too late?"

"Yes," said Savrola; "the game begins to-night."  He took out his
watch; it was a quarter to eleven.

"At twelve o'clock you will hear the alarm-bells.  Sit down, and let us
talk."

Lucile sat down mechanically.

"You love me," he said in an even voice, looking at her
dispassionately, and as if the whole subject of their relations was but
a psychological problem, "and I love you."  There was no answer; he
continued: "But we must part.  In this world we are divided, nor do I
see how the barrier can be removed.  All my life I shall think of you;
no other woman can ever fill the empty space.  Ambitions I still have:
I always had them; but love I am not to know, or to know it only to my
vexation and despair.  I will put it away from me, and henceforth my
affections will be as lifeless as those burnt papers.  And you,--will
you forget?  In the next few hours I may be killed; if so, do not allow
yourself to mourn.  I do not care to be remembered for what I was.  If
I have done anything that may make the world more happy, more cheerful,
more comfortable, let them recall the action.  If I have spoken a
thought which, rising above the vicissitudes of our existence, may make
life brighter or death less gloomy, then let them say, 'He said this or
he did that.'  Forget the man; remember, perhaps, his work.  Remember
too that you have known a soul, somewhere amid the puzzles of the
universe, the complement of your own; and then forget.  Summon your
religion to your aid; anticipate the moment of forgetting; live, and
leave the past alone.  Can you do this?"

"Never!" she answered passionately.  "I will never forget you!"

"We are but poor philosophers," he said.  "Pain and love make sport of
us and all our theories.  We cannot conquer ourselves or rise above our
state."

"Why should we try?" she whispered, looking at him with wild eyes.

He saw and trembled.  Then, with the surge of impulse, he cried, "My
God, how I love you!" and before she could frame a resolution or even
choose her mind, they had kissed each other.

The handle of the door turned quickly.  Both started back.  The door
swung open and the President appeared.  He was in plain clothes, his
right hand concealed behind his back.  Miguel followed from out of the
darkness of the passage.

For a moment there was silence.  Then Molara in a furious voice broke
out: "So, Sir, you attack me in this way also,--coward and scoundrel!"
He raised his hand and pointed the revolver it held full at his enemy.

Lucile, feeling that the world had broken up, fell back against the
sofa, stunned with terror.  Savrola rose and faced the President.  Then
she saw what a brave man he was, for as he did so he contrived to stand
between the weapon and herself.  "Put down your pistol," he said in a
firm voice; "and you shall have an explanation."

"I will put it down," said Molara, "when I have killed you."

Savrola measured the distance between them with his eye.  Could he
spring in under the shot?  Again he looked at the table where his own
revolver lay.  He shielded her, and he decided to stand still.

"Down on your knees and beg for mercy, you hound; down, or I will blow
your face in!"

"I have always tried to despise death, and have always succeeded in
despising you.  I shall bow to neither."

"We shall see," said Molara, grinding his teeth.  "I shall count
five,--one!"

There was a pause.  Savrola looked at the pistol barrel, a black spot
encircled by a ring of bright steel; all the rest of the picture was a
blank.

"Two!" counted the President.

So he was to die,--flash off this earth when that black spot burst into
flame.  He anticipated the blow full in his face; and beyond he saw
nothing,--annihilation,--black, black night.

"Three!"

He could just see the rifling of the barrel; the lands showed faintly.
That was a wonderful invention--to make the bullet spin as it
travelled.  He imagined it churning his brain with hideous energy.  He
tried to think, to take one grip of his philosophy or faith before the
plunge; but his physical sensations were too violent.  To the tips of
his fingers he tingled, as the blood surged through his veins; the
palms of his hands felt hot.

"Four!"

Lucile sprang up, and with a cry threw herself in front of the
President "Wait, wait!" she cried.  "Have mercy!"

Molara met her look, and in those eyes read more than terror.  Then at
last he understood; he started as though he had caught hold of red-hot
iron.  "My God! it's true!" he gasped.  "Strumpet!" he cried, as he
pushed her from him, striking her with the back of his left hand in the
mouth.  She shrank into the far corner of the room.  He saw it all now.
Hoist with his own petard he had lost everything.  Wild fury took hold
of him and shook him till his throat rattled and ached.  She had
deserted him; power was slipping from his grasp; his rival, his enemy,
the man he hated with all his soul was everywhere triumphant.  He had
walked into the trap only to steal the bait; but he should not escape.
There was a limit to prudence and to the love of life.  His plans, his
hopes, the roar of an avenging crowd, all faded from his mind.  Death
should wipe out the long score that stood between them, death which
settled all,--now on the instant.  But he had been a soldier, and was
ever a practical man in the detail of life.  He lowered the pistol and
deliberately cocked it; single action would make certainty more sure;
then he took good aim.

Savrola, seeing that the moment was upon him, lowered his head and
sprang forward.

The President fired.

But Miguel's quick intelligence had appreciated the changed situation,
and he remembered that there were consequences.  He saw that the trick
had become deadly earnest, and he did not forget the mob.  He struck
the pistol up, and the bullet, by a very little, flew high.

In the smoke and the flash Savrola closed with his adversary and bore
him to the ground.  Molara fell underneath and with the concussion
dropped the revolver.  The other seized it, wrenched himself clear, and
sprang back and away from the prostrate figure.  For a moment he stood
there and watched, while the hungry lust of killing rose in his heart
and made his trigger-finger itch.  Then very slowly the President rose.
The fall had dazed him; he leaned against the book-case and groaned.

Below there was a beating at the front door.  Molara turned towards
Lucile, who still cowered in the corner of the room, and began to
revile her.  The common, ugly material of his character showed through
the veneer and polish that varied intercourse and the conduct of great
affairs had superimposed.  His words were not fit to hear, nor worth
remembering; but they stung her to the quick and she rejoined
defiantly: "You knew I was here; you told me to come!  You have laid a
trap; the fault is yours!"  Molara replied by a filthy taunt.  "I am
innocent," she cried; "though I love him, I am innocent!  Why did you
tell me to come here?"

Savrola began to perceive dimly.  "I do not know," he said, "what
villainy you have contrived.  I have wronged you too much to care to
have your blood on my head; but go, and go quickly; I will not endure
your foulness.  Go!"

The President was now recovering his calmness.  "I should have shot you
myself," he said, "but I will have it done by a platoon of
soldiers,--five soldiers and a corporal."

"The murder will be avenged in either case."

"Why did you stop me, Miguel?"

"It is as he says, Your Excellency," replied the Secretary.  "It would
have been a tactical error."

The official manner, the style of address, the man's composure,
restored the President to his senses.  He walked towards the door and
stopping at the sideboard helped himself to a glass of brandy with
ostentation.  "Confiscated," he said, and held it up to the light, "by
order of the Government."  He swallowed it.  "I will see you shot
to-morrow," he added, heedless that the other held the pistol.

"I shall be at the Mayoralty," said Savrola; "you may come and fetch me
if you dare."

"Revolt!" said the President.  "Pooh!  I will stamp it out, and you
too, before the sun has gone down."

"Perhaps there may be another ending to the tale."

"One or the other," said the President.  "You have robbed me of my
honour; you are plotting to rob me of my power.  There is not room for
both of us in the world.  You may take your mistress with you to hell."

There was a noise of hasty footsteps on the stairs; Lieutenant Tiro
flung open the door, but stopped abruptly in astonishment at the
occupants of the room.  "I heard a shot," he said.

"Yes," answered the President; "there has been an accident, but luckily
no harm was done.  Will you please accompany me to the palace?  Miguel,
come!"

"You had better be quick, Sir," said the Subaltern.  "There are many
strange folk about to-night, and they are building a barricade at the
end of the street."

"Indeed?" said the President.  "It is time we took steps to stop them.
Good-night, Sir," he added, turning to Savrola; "we shall meet
to-morrow and finish our discussion."

But Savrola, revolver in hand, looked at him steadily and let him go in
silence, a silence that for a space Lucile's sobs alone disturbed.  At
length, when the retreating footsteps had died away and the street door
had closed, she spoke.  "I cannot stop here."

"You cannot go back to the palace."

"What am I to do, then?"

Savrola reflected.  "You had better stay here for the present.  The
house is at your disposal, and you will be alone.  I must go at once to
the Mayoralty; already I am late,--it is close on twelve,--the moment
approaches.  Besides, Molara will send policemen, and I have duties to
discharge which I cannot avoid.  To-night the streets are too
dangerous.  Perhaps I shall return in the morning."

The tragedy had stunned them both.  A bitter remorse filled Savrola's
heart.  Her life was ruined,--was he the cause?  He could not say how
far he was guilty or innocent; but the sadness of it all was unaltered,
no matter who might be at fault.  "Good-bye," he said rising.  "I must
go, though I leave my heart behind.  Much depends on me,--the lives of
friends, the liberties of a nation."

And so he departed to play a great game in the face of all the world,
to struggle for those ambitions which form the greater part of man's
interest in life; while she, a woman, miserable and now alone, had no
resource but to wait.

And then suddenly the bells began to ring all over the city with quick
impatient strokes.  There was the sound of a far-off bugle-call and a
dull report,--the boom of an alarm-gun.  The tumult grew; the roll of a
drum beating the _assembly_ was heard at the end of the street;
confused shoutings and cries rose from many quarters.  At length one
sound was heard which put an end to all doubts,--_tap_, _tap_, _tap_,
like the subdued slamming of many wooden boxes--the noise of distant
musketry.

The revolution had begun.




CHAPTER XVI.

THE PROGRESS OF THE REVOLT.

Meanwhile the President and his two followers pursued their way through
the city.  Many people were moving about the streets, and here and
there dark figures gathered in groups.  The impression that great
events were impending grew; the very air was sultry and surcharged with
whisperings.  The barricade, which was being built outside Savrola's
house, had convinced Molara that a rising was imminent; half a mile
from the palace the way was blocked by another.  Three carts had been
stopped and drawn across the street, and about fifty men were working
silently to strengthen the obstruction: some pulled up the flat
paving-stones; others were carrying mattresses and boxes filled with
earth from the adjacent houses; but they paid little attention to the
President's party.  He turned up his collar and pressing his felt hat
well down on his face clambered over the barrier,--the significance of
what he saw filling his mind; the Subaltern indeed in his undress
uniform drew some curious looks, but no attempt was made to stop his
progress.  These men waited for the signal.

All this time Molara said not a word.  With the approach of danger he
made great efforts to regain his calmness, that he might have a clear
head to meet it; but for all his strength of will, his hatred of
Savrola filled his mind to the exclusion of everything else.  As he
reached the palace the revolt broke out all over the city.  Messenger
after messenger hurried up with evil news.  Some of the regiments had
refused to fire on the people; others were fraternising with them;
everywhere barricades grew and the approaches to the palace were on all
sides being closed.  The Revolutionary leaders had gathered at the
Mayoralty.  The streets were placarded with the Proclamation of the
Provisional Government.  Officers from various parts of the town
hastened to the palace; some were wounded, many agitated.  Among them
was Sorrento, who brought the terrible news that an entire battery of
artillery had surrendered their guns to the rebels.  By half-past three
it was evident, from the reports which were received by telegram and
messenger, that the greater part of the city had passed into the hands
of the Revolutionaries with very little actual fighting.

The President bore all with a calmness which revealed the full strength
of his hard, stern character.  He had, in truth, a terrible stimulant.
Beyond the barricades and the rebels who lined them was the Mayoralty
and Savrola.  The face and figure of his enemy was before his eyes;
everything else seemed of little importance.  Yet he found in the
blinding emergency an outlet for his fury, a counter-irritant for his
grief; to crush the revolt, but above all to kill Savrola, was his
heart's desire.

"We must wait for daylight," he said.

"And what then, Sir?" asked the War-Minister.

"We will then proceed to the Mayoralty and arrest the leaders of this
disturbance."

The rest of the night was spent in organising a force with which to
move at dawn.  A few hundred faithful soldiers (men who had served with
Molara in the former war), seventy officers of the regular army, whose
loyalty was unquestionable, and the remaining battalion of the Guard
with a detachment of armed police, were alone available.  This band of
devoted men, under fourteen hundred in number, collected in the open
space in front of the palace-gates, and guarded the approaches while
they waited for sunrise.

They were not attacked.  "Secure the city," had been Savrola's order,
and the rebels were busily at work on the barricades, which in a
regular system rose on all sides.  Messages of varied import continued
to reach the President.  Louvet, in a hurried note, expressed his
horror at the revolt, and explained how much he regretted being unable
to join the President at the palace.  He had to leave the city in great
haste, he said; a relative was dangerously ill.  He adjured Molara to
trust in Providence; for his part he was confident that the
Revolutionaries would be suppressed.

The President in his room read this with a dry, hard laugh.  He had
never put the slightest faith in Louvet's courage, having always
realised that in a crisis he would be useless and a coward.  He did not
blame him; the man had his good points, and as a public official in the
Home-Office he was admirable; but war was not his province.

He passed the letter to Miguel.  The Secretary read it and reflected.
He also was no soldier.  It was evident that the game was up, and there
was no need for him to throw his life away, merely out of sentiment as
he said to himself.  He thought of the part he had played in the drama
of the night.  That surely gave him some claims; it would be possible
at least to hedge.  He took a fresh piece of paper and began to write.
Molara paced the room.  "What are you writing?" he asked.

"An order to the Commandant of the harbour-forts," replied Miguel
promptly, "to acquaint him with the situation and tell him to hold his
posts in your name at all hazards."

"It is needless," said Molara; "either his men are traitors or they are
not."

"I have told him," said Miguel quickly, "to make a demonstration
towards the palace at dawn, if he can trust his men.  It will create a
diversion."

"Very well," said Molara wearily; "but I doubt it ever reaching him,
and he has so few men that could be spared after the forts are held
adequately."

An orderly entered with a telegram.  The clerk at the office, a
loyalist, an unknown man of honour, had brought it himself, passing the
line of barricades with extraordinary good-fortune and courage.  While
the President tore the envelope open, Miguel rose and left the room.
Outside in the brilliantly lighted passage he found a servant,
terrified but not incapable.  He spoke to the man quickly and in a low
voice; _twenty pounds, the Mayoralty, at all costs_, were the
essentials of his instructions.  Then he re-entered the office.

"Look here," said Molara; "it is not all over yet."  The telegram was
from Brienz, near Lorenzo: _Clear the line.  Strelitz and force two
thousand rebels advanced on the Black Gorge this afternoon.  I have
repulsed them with heavy loss.  Strelitz is prisoner.  Am pursuing
remainder.  I await instructions at Turga_.  "This must be published at
once," he said.  "Get a thousand copies printed, and have them
circulated among the loyalists and as far as possible in the city."

The news of the victory was received with cheers by the troops gathered
in the palace-square, and they waited with impatience for morning.  At
length the light of day began to grow in the sky, and other lights, the
glow of distant conflagrations, paled.  The President, followed by
Sorrento, a few officers of high rank, and his aide-de-camp Tiro,
descended the steps, traversed the courtyard and passing through the
great gates of the palace, entered the square where the last reserves
of his power were assembled.  He walked about and shook hands right and
left with these faithful friends and supporters.  Presently his eye
caught sight of the rebel proclamation which some daring hand had
placed on the wall under cover of the darkness.  He walked up and read
it by the light of a lantern.  Savrola's style was not easy to mistake.
The short crisp sentences of the appeal to the people to take up arms
rang like a trumpet-call.  Across the placard a small red slip, such as
are used on theatrical advertisements to show the time of the
performance, had been posted at a later hour.  It purported to be the
_facsimile_ of a telegram and ran thus: _Forced Black Gorge this
morning.  Dictator's troops in full retreat.  Am marching on Lorenzo.
Strelitz._

Molara quivered with fury.  Savrola did not neglect details, and threw
few chances away.  "Infamous liar!" was the President's comment; but he
realised the power of the man he sought to crush, and for a moment
despair welled in his heart and seemed to chill his veins.  He shook
the sensation off with a great effort.

The officers were already in possession of the details of the plan,
whose boldness was its main recommendation.  The rebels had succeeded
in launching their enterprise; the Government would reply by a _coup
d'état_.  In any case the stroke was aimed at the heart of the revolt,
and if it went home the results would be decisive.  "The octopus of
Rebellion, Gentlemen," said the President to those around him, and
pointing to the Revolutionary proclamation, "has long arms.  It will be
necessary to cut off his head."  And though all felt the venture to be
desperate, they were brave men and knew their minds.

The distance from the palace to the Mayoralty was nearly a mile and a
half along a broad but winding avenue; by this avenue, and by the
narrower streets on either side, the force advanced silently in three
divisions.  The President marched on foot with the centre column;
Sorrento took command of the left, which was the threatened flank.
Slowly, and with frequent halts to keep up communication with each
other, the troops marched along the silent streets.  Not a soul was to
be seen: all the shutters of the houses were closed, all the doors
fastened; and though the sky grew gradually brighter in the East, the
city was still plunged in gloom.  The advanced files pressed forward up
the avenue, running from tree to tree, and pausing cautiously at each
to peer through the darkness.  Suddenly as they rounded a bend, a shot
rang out in front.  "Forward!" cried the President.  The bugles sounded
the charge and the drums beat.  In the dim light the outline of a
barricade was visible two hundred yards off, a dark obstruction across
the roadway.  The soldiers shouted and broke into a run.  The defenders
of the barricade, surprised, opened an ineffective fire and then,
seeing that the attack was in earnest and doubtful of its strength,
beat a retreat while time remained.  The barricade was captured in a
moment, and the assailants pressed on elated by success.  Behind the
barricade was a cross street, right and left.  Firing broke out
everywhere, and the loud noise of the rifles echoed from the walls of
the houses.  The flanking columns had been sharply checked at their
barricades, but the capture of the centre position turned both of
these, and their defenders, fearing to be cut off, fled in disorder.

It was now daylight, and the scene in the streets was a strange one.
The skirmishers darted between the trees, and the little blue-white
puffs of smoke spotted the whole picture.  The retiring rebels left
their wounded on the ground, and these the soldiers bayoneted savagely.
Shots were fired from the windows of the houses and from any shelter
that offered,--a lamp-post, a pillar-box, a wounded man, an overturned
cab.  The rifle-fire was searching, and the streets were very bare.  In
their desire to get cover, to get behind something, both sides broke
into the houses and dragged out chairs, tables, and piles of bedding;
and though these were but little protection from the bullets, men felt
less naked behind them.

All this time the troops were steadily advancing, though suffering
continual loss; but gradually the fire of the rebels grew hotter.  More
men were hurried to the scene each moment; the pressure on the flanks
became severe; the enveloping enemy pressed in down the side streets,
to hold which the scanty force at the President's disposal had to be
further weakened.  At length the rebels ceased to retreat; they had
reached their guns, four of which were arranged in a row across the
avenue.

The Mayoralty was now but a quarter of a mile away, and Molara called
on his soldiers for a supreme effort.  A dashing attempt to carry the
guns with the bayonet was defeated with a loss of thirty killed and
wounded, and the Government troops took shelter in a side street at
right angles to the main avenue.  This in turn was enfiladed by the
enemy, who swept round the columns and began to cut in on their line of
retreat.

Firing was now general along a wide half-circle.  In the hope of
driving the improvised artillery-men from their places, the troops
forced their way into the houses on either side of the avenue, and
climbing along the roofs began to fire down on their adversaries.  But
the rebels, repeating the manoeuvre, met them and the attempt dwindled
into desperate but purposeless fighting among the chimney-pots and the
skylights.

The President exposed himself manfully.  Moving from one part of the
force to another, he animated his followers by his example.  Tiro, who
kept close to him, had seen enough war to realise that the check was
fatal to their chances.  Every moment was precious; time was slipping
away, and the little force was already almost completely encircled.  He
had taken a rifle and was assisting to burst in the door of a house,
when to his astonishment he saw Miguel.  The Secretary was armed.  He
had hitherto remained carefully in the rear, and had avoided the danger
in the air by hiding behind the trees of the avenue; but now he
advanced boldly to the doorway and began to help in battering it down.
No sooner was this done than he darted in and ran up the stairs crying
out, "We are all soldiers to-day!"  Several infantrymen followed him to
fire from the lowest windows, but Tiro could not leave the President;
he felt, however, surprised and pleased by Miguel's gallantry.

It soon became evident to all that the attempt had failed.  The numbers
against them were too great.  A third of the force had been killed or
wounded, when the order to cut their way back to the palace was given.
On all sides the exulting enemy pressed fiercely.  Isolated parties of
soldiers, cut off from the retiring column, defended themselves
desperately in the houses and on the roofs.  They were nearly all
killed eventually, for everyone's blood was up, and it was a waste of
time to ask for quarter.  Others set fire to the houses and tried to
escape under cover of the smoke; but very few succeeded.  Others again,
and among them Miguel, lay hid in closets and cellars, from which they
emerged when men's tempers were again human and _surrender_ was not an
unknown word.  The right column, which consisted of five companies of
the Guard battalion, were completely surrounded, and laid down their
arms on the promise of a rebel general that their lives should be
spared.  The promise was kept, and it appeared that the superior
officers among the Revolutionists were making great efforts to restrain
the fury of their followers.

The main body of the Government troops, massed in a single column,
struggled on towards the palace losing men at every step.  But in spite
of their losses, they were dangerous people to stop.  One party of
rebels, who intercepted their line of retreat, was swept away in a
savage charge, and some attempt was made to reform; but the rifle-fire
was pitiless and incessant, and eventually the retreat became a rout.
A bloody pursuit followed in which only some eighty men escaped capture
or death, and with the President and Sorrento regained the palace
alive.  The great gates were closed, and the slender garrison prepared
to defend themselves to the last.




CHAPTER XVII.

THE DEFENCE OF THE PALACE.

"That," said Lieutenant Tiro to a Captain of Artillery, as they got
inside the gate, "is about the best I've seen so far."

"I thought it was a bad business all through," replied the other; "and
when they brought the guns up it was a certainty."

"It wasn't the guns that did us," said the Lancer Subaltern, who had no
exaggerated idea of the value of artillery; "we wanted some cavalry."

"We wanted more men," answered the Gunner, not anxious at that moment
to argue the relative values of the different arms.  "These rear-guard
actions are the devil."

"There was a damned sight more action than there was rear-guard about
that last bit," said Tiro.  "Do you suppose they cut up the wounded?"

"Every one of them, I should think; they were like wolves at the end."

"What's going to happen now?"

"They're going to come in here and finish us off."

"We'll see about that," said Tiro.  His cheery courage could stand a
prolonged test.  "The fleet will be back soon; we shall hold this place
till then."

The palace was indeed not unsuited to defence.  It was solidly built of
stone.  The windows were at some distance from the ground and the lower
strongly barred, except on the garden-side, where the terrace and its
steps gave access to the long French windows.  But it was evident that
a few good rifles could forbid the bare and narrow approaches in that
quarter.  Indeed it seemed as though the architect must have
contemplated the occasion that had now arrived, for he had almost built
a stronghold disguised as a palace.  The side which faced the square
seemed to afford the best prospects to an assault; yet the great gate
was protected by two small towers containing guard-rooms, and the wall
of the courtyard was high and thick.  As it seemed, however, that on
this front the enemy would be able to use their numbers to the greatest
effect, the majority of the little garrison were concentrated there.

The rebels were wisely and cautiously led.  They did not at once push
on to the attack of the palace; sure of their prey they could afford to
wait.  Meanwhile the surviving adherents of the Government endeavoured
to make their last foothold secure.  Rough-hewn cobblestones from the
pavements of the courtyard were prized up, and the windows were with
these converted into loopholes through which the garrison might fire
without much exposure.  The gates were closed and barred, and
preparations made to strut them with baulks of timber.  Ammunition was
distributed.  The duty and responsibility of each section of the
defence was apportioned to the various officers.  The defenders
recognised that they had entered on a quarrel which must be carried to
a definite conclusion.

But Molara's mood had changed.  The fury of the night had cooled into
the hard, savage courage of the morning.  He had led the desperate
attempt to capture the Mayoralty, and had exposed himself freely and
even recklessly in the tumult of the fight that followed; but now that
he had come through unhurt, had regained the palace, and realised that
his last chance of killing Savrola had passed, death appeared very
ugly.  All the excitement which had supported him had died away; he had
had enough.  His mind searched for some way of escape, and searched
vainly.  The torture of the moment was keen.  A few hours might bring
help: the fleet would surely come; but it would be too late.  The great
guns might take vengeance for his death; they could not save his life.
A feeling of vexation shook him, and behind it grew the realisation of
the approaching darkness.  Terror began to touch his heart; his nerve
flickered; he had more to fear than the others.  The hatred of the
multitude was centred in him; after all it was his blood they
wanted,--his above all others.  It was a dreadful distinction.  He
retired in deep despondency to his own room, and took no part in the
defence.

At about eleven o'clock the sharpshooters of the enemy began to make
their way into the houses which surrounded the front of the palace.
Presently from an upper window a shot was fired; others followed, and
soon a regular fusilade began.  The defenders, sheltered by their
walls, replied carefully.  Lieutenant Tiro and a sergeant of the
Guards, an old war-time comrade of Molara's, were holding the window of
the guard-room on the left of the great gate.  Both were good shots.
The Subaltern had filled his pockets with cartridges; the Sergeant
arranged his on the sill in neat little rows of five.  From their
position they could shoot right down the street which led into the
square and towards the gate.  Outside the guard-room a dozen officers
and men were still engaged in making the entrance more secure.  They
tried to wedge a great plank between the ground and the second
cross-piece; should the rebels try to rush the gate-way, it would thus
be strong enough to resist them.

The fire from the surrounding houses was annoying rather than
dangerous, but several bullets struck the stones of the improvised
loopholes.  The garrison fired carefully and slowly, anxious not to
expend their ammunition, or to expose themselves without a result.
Suddenly, about three hundred yards away, a number of men turned into
the street which led to the gate, and began rapidly pushing and pulling
something forward.

"Look out," cried Tiro to the working-party; "they're bringing up a
gun;" and taking good aim he fired at the approaching enemy.  The
Sergeant, and all the other defenders of this side of the palace, fired
too with strange energy.  The advancing crowd slackened speed.  Among
them men began to drop.  Several in front threw up their hands; others
began carrying these away.  The attack dwindled.  Then two or three men
ran back alone.  At that all the rest turned tail and scurried for the
cover of the side street, leaving the gun (one of the captured
twelve-pounders) standing deserted in the middle of the roadway, with
about a dozen shapeless black objects lying round it.

The garrison raised a cheer, which was answered from the surrounding
houses by an increase of musketry.

A quarter of an hour passed and then the rebels debouched from the side
streets into the main approach and began pushing up four carts filled
with sacks of flour.  Again the defenders fired rapidly.  Their
bullets, striking the sacks, raised strange creamy white clouds; but
the assailants, sheltered by their movable cover, continued to advance
steadily.  They reached the gun, and began emptying the carts by
pushing the sacks out from behind, until a regular breastwork was
formed, behind which they knelt down.  Some began firing; others
devoted their efforts to discharging the gun, on which the aim of the
garrison was now directed.  With a loss of two men they succeeded in
loading it and pointing it at the gate.  A third man advanced to fix
the friction-tube by which it was fired.

Tiro took steady aim and the distant figure collapsed to the shot.

"Bull's eye," said the Sergeant appreciatively, and leaned forward to
fire at another, who had advanced with desperate bravery to discharge
the piece.  He paused long on his aim, wishing to make certain; holding
his breath he began gently to squeeze the trigger, as the
musketry-books enjoin.  Suddenly there was a very strange sound, half
thud, half smash.  Tiro, shrinking swiftly to the left, just avoided
being splashed with blood and other physical details.  The Sergeant had
been killed by a bullet which had come to meet him as he looked through
his loophole.  The distant man had fixed his tube, and, catching up the
lanyard, stood back and aside to fire.

"Stand from the gate," shouted Tiro to the working-party; "I can't hold
'em!"  He raised his rifle and fired on the chance.  At the same
instant a great cloud of smoke burst from the gun and another sprang up
at the palace gate.  The woodwork was smashed to pieces and, with the
splinters of the shell, flew on, overtaking with death and wounds the
working-party as they scampered to cover.

A long loud burst of cheering arose on all sides from the surrounding
houses and streets, and was taken up by the thousands who were waiting
behind and heard the explosion of the gun.  At first the rebel fire
increased, but very soon a bugler began to sound perseveringly, and
after about twenty minutes the musketry ceased altogether.  Then from
over the barricade a man with a white flag advanced, followed by two
others.  The truce was acknowledged from the palace by the waving of a
handkerchief.  The deputation walked straight up to the shattered
gateway, and their leader, stepping through, entered the courtyard.
Many of the defenders left their stations to look at him and hear what
terms were offered.  It was Moret.

"I call upon you all to surrender," he said.  "Your lives will be
spared until you have been fairly tried."

"Address yourself to me, Sir," said Sorrento stepping forward; "I am in
command here."

"I call upon you all to surrender in the name of the Republic,"
repeated Moret loudly.

"I forbid you to address these soldiers," said Sorrento.  "If you do so
again, your flag shall not protect you."

Moret turned to him.  "Resistance is useless," he said.  "Why will you
cause further loss of life?  Surrender, and your lives shall be safe."

Sorrento reflected.  Perhaps the rebels knew that the fleet was
approaching; otherwise, he thought they would not offer terms.  It was
necessary to gain time.  "We shall require two hours fro consider the
terms," he said.

"No," answered Moret decidedly.  "You must surrender at once, here and
now."

"We shall do no such thing," replied the War-Minister.  "The palace is
defensible.  We shall hold it until the return of the fleet and of the
victorious field-army."

"You refuse all terms?"

"We refuse all you have offered."

"Soldiers," said Moret turning again to the men, "I implore you not to
throw away your lives.  I offer fair terms; do not reject them."

"Young man," said Sorrento with rising anger, "I have a somewhat
lengthy score to settle with you already.  You are a civilian and are
ignorant of the customs of war.  It is my duty to warn you that, if you
continue to attempt to seduce the loyalty of the Government troops, I
shall fire at you."  He drew his revolver.

Moret should have heeded; but tactless, brave, and impulsive as he was,
he recked little.  His warm heart generously hoped to save further loss
of life.  Besides, he did not believe that Sorrento would shoot him in
cold blood; it would be too merciless.  "I offer you all life," he
cried; "do not choose death."

Sorrento raised his pistol and fired.  Moret fell to the ground, and
his blood began to trickle over the white flag.  For a moment he
twisted and quivered, and then lay still.  There were horrified murmurs
from the bystanders, who had not expected to see the threat carried
out.  But it is not well to count on the mercy of such men as this
War-Minister; they live their lives too much by rule and regulation.

The two men outside the gate, hearing the shot, looked in, saw, and ran
swiftly back to their comrades, while the garrison, feeling that they
must now abandon all hope, returned to their posts slowly and sullenly.
The report of a truce had drawn the President from his room, with a
fresh prospect of life, and perhaps of vengeance, opening on his
imagination.  As he came down the steps into the courtyard, the shot,
in such close proximity, startled him; when he saw the condition of the
bearer of terms, he staggered.  "Good God!" he said to Sorrento, "what
have you done?"

"I have shot a rebel, Sir," replied the War-Minister, his heart full of
misgivings, but trying to brazen it out, "for inciting the troops to
mutiny and desertion, after due warning that his flag would no longer
protect him."

Molara quivered from head to foot; he felt the last retreat cut off.
"You have condemned us all to death," he said.  Then he stooped and
drew a paper which protruded from the dead man's coat.  It ran as
follows: _I authorise you to accept the surrender of Antonio Molara,
ex-President of the Republic, and of such officers, soldiers, and
adherents as may be holding the Presidential Palace.  Their lives are
to be spared, and they shall be protected pending the decision of the
Government.  For the Council of Public Safety_,--SAVROLA.  And Sorrento
had killed him,--the only man who could save them from the fury of the
crowd.  Too sick at heart to speak Molara turned away, and as he did so
the firing from the houses of the square recommenced with savage
vigour.  The besiegers knew now how their messenger had fared.

And all the while Moret lay very still out there in the courtyard.  All
his ambitions, his enthusiasms, his hopes had come to a full stop; his
share in the world's affairs was over; he had sunk into the ocean of
the past, and left scarcely a bubble behind.  In all the contriving of
the plot against the Lauranian Government Savrola's personality had
dwarfed his.  Yet this was a man of heart and brain and nerve, one who
might have accomplished much; and he had a mother and two young sisters
who loved the soil he trod on, and thought him the finest fellow in the
world.

Sorrento stood viewing his handiwork for a long time, with a growing
sense of dissatisfaction at his deed.  His sour, hard nature was
incapable of genuine remorse, but he had known Molara for many years
and was shocked to see his pain, and annoyed to think that he was the
cause.  He had not realised that the President wished to surrender;
otherwise, he said to himself, he might have been more lenient.  Was
there no possible way of repairing the harm?  The man who had
authorised Moret to accept their surrender had power with the crowd; he
would be at the Mayoralty,--he must be sent for,--but how?

Lieutenant Tiro approached with a coat in his hands.  Disgusted at his
superior's brutality, he was determined to express his feelings,
clearly if not verbally.  He bent over the body and composed the limbs;
then he laid the coat over the white expressionless face, and rising
said insolently to the Colonel: "I wonder if they'll do that for you in
a couple of hours' time, Sir."

Sorrento looked at him, and laughed harshly.  "Pooh!  What do I care?
When you have seen as much fighting as I have, you will not be so
squeamish."

"I am not likely to see much more, now that you have killed the only
man who could accept our surrender."

"There is another," said the War-Minister, "Savrola.  If you want to
live, go and bring him to call off his hounds."

Sorrento spoke bitterly, but his words set the Subaltern's mind
working.  Savrola,--he knew him, liked him, and felt they had something
in common.  Such a one would come if he were summoned; but to leave the
palace seemed impossible.  Although the attacks of the rebels had been
directed against the side of the main entrance only, a close investment
and a dropping musketry were maintained throughout the complete circle.
To pass the line of besiegers by the roads was out of the question.
Tiro thought of the remaining alternatives: a tunnel, that did not
exist; a balloon, there was not one.  Shaking his head at the hopeless
problem he gazed contemplatively into the clear air, thinking to
himself: "It would take a bird to do it."

The palace was connected with the Senate-House and with the principal
Public Offices by telephone, and it happened that the main line of
wires from the eastern end of the great city passed across its roof.
Tiro, looking up, saw the slender threads overhead; there seemed to be
nearly twenty of them.  The War-Minister followed his gaze.  "Could you
get along the wires?" he asked eagerly.

"I will try," answered the Subaltern, thrilled with the idea.

Sorrento would have shaken his hand, but the boy stepped backward and
saluting turned away.  He entered the palace, and ascended the stairs
which led to the flat roof.  The attempt was daring and dangerous.
What if the rebels should see him in mid air?  He had often shot with a
pea-rifle at rooks, black spots against the sky and among the branches.
The thought seemed strangely disagreeable; but he consoled himself with
the reflection that men who look through loopholes at the peril of
their lives have little leisure for aught but aiming, and rarely let
their eyes wander idly.  He stepped out on to the roof and walked to
the telegraph-post.  There was no doubt as to its strength;
nevertheless he paused, for the chances against him were great, and
death seemed near and terrible.  His religion, like that of many
soldiers, was of little help; it was merely a jumble of formulas,
seldom repeated, hardly understood, never investigated, and a hopeful,
but unauthorised, belief that it would be well with him if he did his
duty like a gentleman.  He had no philosophy; he felt only that he was
risking all that he had, and for what he was uncertain.  Still, though
there were gaps in his reasoning, he thought it might be done and he
would have a dash for it.  He said to himself, "It will score off those
swine," and with this inspiring reflection he dismissed his fears.

He swarmed up the pole to the lowest wire; then he pulled himself
higher until he could get his foot on the insulators.  The wires ran on
both sides of the pole in two sets.  He stood on the two lowest, took
the top ones under his arms, and, reaching down over, caught one more
in each hand.  Then he started, shuffling awkwardly along.  The span
was about seventy yards.  As he cleared the parapet he saw the street
beneath him,--very far beneath him, it seemed.  Shots were continually
exchanged from the windows of the houses and the palace.  Sixty feet
below a dead man lay staring up through the wires undazzled by the
bright sun.  He had been _under_ fire before, but this was a novel
experience.  As he approached the middle of the span the wires began to
swing, and he had to hold on tightly.  At first the slope had been on
his side, but after the centre was passed it rose against him; his feet
slipped often backwards, and the wires commenced to cut into his
armpits.

Two-thirds of the distance was safely accomplished, when the wires
under his left foot parted with a snap and dropped like a whip-lash
against the wall of the opposite house.  His weight fell on his
shoulders; the pain was sharp; he twisted,--slipped,--clutched wildly,
and recovered himself by a tremendous effort.

A man at a lower window pulled back the mattress behind which he was
firing and thrust his head and shoulders out.  Tiro looked down and
their eyes met.  The man shouted in mad excitement, and fired his rifle
point-blank at the Subaltern.  The noise of the report prevented him
from knowing how near the bullet had passed; but he felt he was not
shot, and struggled on till he had passed the street.

It was all up; yet to turn back was equally fatal.  "I'll see it out,"
he said to himself, and dropped from the wires on to the roof of the
house.  The door from the leads was open.  Running down the attic
stairs and emerging on the landing, he peered over the bannisters; no
one was to be seen.  He descended the narrow staircase cautiously,
wondering where his enemy could be.  Presently he was opposite the
front room on the second floor.  Keeping close to the wall he peered
in.  The room was half-darkened.  The windows were blocked by boxes,
portmanteaus, mattresses, and pillow-cases filled with earth; broken
glass, mingled with bits of plaster from the walls, littered the floor.
By the light which filtered in through the chinks and loopholes, he saw
a strange scene.  There were four men in the room; one on his back on
the ground, and the others bending over him.  Their rifles were leaned
against the wall.  They seemed to have eyes only for their comrade who
lay on the floor in an ever-widening pool of blood, gurgling, choking,
and apparently making tremendous efforts to speak.

The Subaltern had seen enough.  Opposite the front room was a doorway
covered by a curtain, behind which he glided.  Nothing was to be seen,
but he listened intently.

"Poor chap," said a voice, "he's got it real bad."

"How did it happen?" asked another.

"Oh, he leaned out of the window to have a shot,--bullet hit
him,--right through the lungs, I think,--fired in the air, and
shouted."  Then in a lower but still audible tone he added, "Done for!"

The wounded man began making extraordinary noises.

"Su'thin' he wants to tell 'is pore wife before he goes," said one of
the Revolutionaries, who seemed by his speech a workman.  "What is it,
mate?"

"Give him a pencil and paper; he can't speak."

Tiro's heart stood still, and his hand stole back for his revolver.

For nearly a minute nothing audible happened; then there was a shout.

"By God, we'll cop him!" said the workman, and all three of them
stamped past the curtained door and ran up-stairs.  One man paused just
opposite; he was loading his rifle and the cartridge stuck; he banged
it on the ground, apparently with success, for the Subaltern heard the
bolt click, and the swift footsteps followed the others towards the
roof.

Then he emerged from his hiding-place and stole downwards.  But as he
passed the open room he could not resist looking in.  The wounded man
saw him in an instant.  He half raised himself from the ground and made
terrible efforts to shout; but no articulate sound came forth.  Tiro
looked for a moment at this stranger whom chance had made his
implacable enemy, and then, at the prompting of that cruel devil that
lurks in the hearts of men and is awakened by bloodshed and danger, he
kissed his hand to him in savage, bitter mockery.  The other sank
backwards in a paroxysm of pain and fury and lay gasping on the floor.
The Subaltern hurried away.  Reaching the lowest storey he turned into
the kitchen, where the window was but six feet from the ground.
Vaulting on to the sill he dropped into the backyard, and then, with a
sudden feeling of wild panic, began to run at top speed,--the terror
that springs from returning hope hard on his track.




CHAPTER XVIII.

FROM A WINDOW.

While the swift succession of great events in the Lauranian capital had
occupied with immediate emergency the minds of the men, it had been
different with the women.  Out in the streets there had been vivid
scenes, hot blood, and excitement.  The dangers of war, and the
occasion of close and involved fighting, had given many opportunities
for acts of devotion and brutality.  The brave man had displayed his
courage; the cruel had indulged his savagery; all the intermediate
types had been thrilled with the business of the moment, and there had
scarce been time for any but involuntary terror.  Within the houses it
was different.

Lucile started up at the first sound of firing.  There was not much to
hear, a distant and confused popping with an occasional ragged crash;
but she knew what all this meant and shuddered.  The street below
seemed from the noise to be full of people.  She rose and going to the
window looked down.  By the sickly, uncertain light of the gas-lamps
men were working busily at a barricade, which ran across the street
about twenty yards from the door and on the side towards the palace.
She watched the bustling figures with strange interest.  They
distracted her thoughts and she felt that if she had nothing to look at
she would go mad with the dreadful suspense.  Not a detail escaped her.

How hard they worked!  Men with crowbars and pickaxes were prizing up
the paving-stones; others carried them along, staggering under their
weight; others again piled them into a strong wall across the road.
There were two or three boys working away as hard as any of them.  One
little fellow dropped the stone he was carrying on his foot, and
forthwith sat down to cry bitterly.  His companion came up and kicked
him to stimulate his efforts, but he only cried the more.  Presently a
water-cart arrived, and the thirsty builders went by threes and fours
to drink, dipping two tin mugs and a gallipot in the water.

The people in the houses round were made to open their doors, and the
rebels unceremoniously dragged out all sorts of things to put on their
barricade.  One party discovered several barrels which they appeared to
consider a valuable prize.  Knocking in the end of one cask they began
filling it, spadeful by spadeful, with the earth which the removal of
the pavement had laid bare.  It was a long business, but at last they
finished and tried to lift the barrel on to the wall; but it was too
heavy, and falling with a crash to the ground it broke all in pieces.
At this they were furious and disputed angrily, till an officer with a
red sash came up and silenced them.  They did not attempt to fill the
other casks, but re-entering the house brought out a comfortable sofa
and sat down on it sullenly, lighting their pipes.  One by one,
however, they got to work again, coming out of their sulky fit by
degrees, and careful of their dignity.  And all this time the barricade
grew steadily.

Lucile wondered why no one had entered Savrola's house.  Presently she
perceived the reason; there was a picket of four men with rifles on the
doorstep.  Nothing had been forgotten by that comprehensive mind.  So
the hours passed.  From time to time her thoughts reverted to the
tragedy which had swept upon her life, and she would sink back on to
the sofa in despair.  Once, from sheer weariness, she dozed for an
hour.  The distant firing had died away and, though single shots were
occasionally heard, the city was generally silent.  Waking with a
strange feeling of uneasy trouble she ran again to the window.  The
barricade was completed now, and the builders were lying down behind
it.  Their weapons leaned against the wall on which two or three
watchers stood, looking constantly up the street.

Presently there was a hammering at the street-door, which made her
heart beat with fear.  She leaned cautiously out of the window.  The
picket was still at its post, but another man had joined them.  Finding
that he could not obtain an answer to his knocking, he stooped down,
pushed something under the door, and went his way.  After a time she
summoned up courage to creep down, through the darkness of the
staircase, to see what this might be.  By the light of a match she saw
that it was a note addressed simply _Lucile_ with the number of the
house and street,--for the streets were all numbered in Laurania as in
American cities.  It was from Savrola, in pencil and to this effect:
_The city and forts have passed into our hands, but there will be
fighting at daylight.  On no account leave the house or expose
yourself_.

Fighting at daylight!  She looked at the clock,--a quarter to five, and
already the sky was growing brighter; the time was at hand then!  Fear,
grief, anxiety, and, not the least painful, resentment at her husband
conflicted in her mind.  But the sleeping figures behind the barricade
seemed to be troubled by none of these feelings; they lay silent and
still, weary men who had no cares.  But she knew it was coming,
something loud and terrible that would wake them with a start.  She
felt as though she was watching a play at the theatre, the window
suggesting a box.  She had turned from it for a moment, when suddenly a
rifle-shot rang out, apparently about three hundred yards down the
street towards the palace.  Then there was a splutter of firing, a
bugle-call, and the sound of shouting.  The defenders of the barricade
sprang up in mad haste and seized their weapons.  There was more
firing, but still they did not reply, and she dared not put her head
out of the window to see what prevented them.  They were all greatly
excited, holding their rifles over the barricade, and many talking in
quick short sentences.  In a moment a crowd of men, nearly a hundred it
seemed, ran up to the wall and began scrambling over, helped by the
others.  They were friends, then; it occurred to her that there must be
another barricade, and that the one under the window was in the second
line.  This was actually the case, and the first had been captured.
All the time firing from the direction of the palace continued.

As soon as the fugitives were all across the wall, the defenders of the
second line began to fire.  The rifles close by sounded so much louder
than the others, and gave forth such bright flashes.  But the light was
growing every minute, and soon she could see the darting puffs of
smoke.  The rebels were armed with many kinds of firearms.  Some, with
old, muzzle-loading muskets, had to stand up and descend from the
barricade to use their ramrods; others, armed with more modern weapons,
remained crouching behind their cover and fired continually.

The scene, filled with little foreshortened figures, still suggested
the stage of a theatre viewed from the gallery.  She did not as yet
feel frightened; no harm had been done, and no one seemed to be any the
worse.

She had scarcely completed this thought when she noticed a figure being
lifted off the barricade to the ground.  In the growing daylight the
pale face showed distinctly, and a deadly feeling of sickness came over
her in a moment; but she stood spell-bound by the sight.  Four men went
off with the wounded one, carrying him by the shoulders and feet, so
that he drooped in the middle.  When they had passed out of her view,
she looked back to the wall.  There were five more men wounded; four
had to be carried, the other leaned on a comrade's arm.  Two more
figures had also been pulled off the barricade, and laid carelessly on
the pavement out of the way.  Nobody seemed to take any notice of
these, but just let them lie close to the area-railings.

Then from the far end of the street came the sound of drums and the
shrill call of a bugle, repeated again and again.  The rebels began to
shoot in mad excitement as fast as they could; several fell, and above
the noise of the firing rose a strange sound, a sort of hoarse,
screaming whoop, coming momentarily nearer.

A man on the barricade jumped off and began to run down the street;
five, six others followed at once; then all the defenders but three
hurried away from that strange approaching cry.  Several tried to drag
with them the wounded, of which there already were a few more; these
cried out in pain and begged to be left alone.  One man, she saw,
dragging another by the ankle, bumping him along the rough roadway in
spite of his entreaties.  The three men who had stayed fired
methodically from behind their breastwork.  All this took several
seconds; and the menacing shout came nearer and louder all the time.

Then in an instant a wave of men,--soldiers in blue uniforms faced with
buff--surged up to the barricade and over it.  An officer, quite a boy,
in front of them all, jumped down the other side, shouting, "Make a
clear sweep of the cowardly devils,--come on!"

The three steadfast men had disappeared as rocks beneath the incoming
tide.  Crowds of soldiers climbed over the barricade; she could see
groups of them swarming round each of the wounded rebels, jobbing
downwards with their bayonets savagely.  And then the spell broke, the
picture swam, and she rushed screaming from the window to plunge her
face among the sofa-cushions.

The uproar was now terrific.  The musketry-fire was loud and
continuous, especially from the direction of the main avenue which ran
parallel to the street in which Savrola lived, and the shouting and
trampling of men added to the din.  Gradually the wave of fighting
rolled past the house and on towards the Mayoralty.  As she realised
this, all her own troubles returned to her mind.  The fight was going
against the rebels; she thought of Savrola.  And then she
prayed,--prayed convulsively, sending her entreaties into space in the
hope that they would not fall on unheeding ears.  She spoke no name;
but the gods, who are omniscient, may have guessed, with sardonic
smiles, that she prayed for the victory of the rebel she loved over her
husband, the President.

Presently there was a tremendous noise from the direction of the
Mayoralty.  "Cannons," she thought, but she dared not look out of the
window; the horrid sights had sickened curiosity itself.  But she could
hear the fire coming nearer, coming back again; and at that she felt a
strange joy; something of the joy of success in war, amid all her
terrors.  There was a noise of people streaming past the house; shots
were fired under the windows; then came a great hammering and battering
at the street-door.  They were breaking into the house!  She rushed to
the door of the room and locked it.  Down-stairs there were several
shots, and the noise of splintering wood.  The firing of the retreating
troops drifted back past the house and towards the palace; but she did
not heed it; another sound paralysed her attention, the sound of
approaching footsteps.  Someone was coming up-stairs.  She held her
breath.  The handle turned, and then the unknown, finding the door
locked, kicked it savagely.  Lucile screamed.

The kicking ceased, and she heard the stranger give a dreadful groan.
"For the mercy of Heaven, let me in!  I am wounded and have no arms."
He began to wail pitifully.

Lucile listened.  It seemed that there was but one, and if he were
wounded, he would not harm her.  There was another groan outside.
Human sympathy rose in her heart; she unlocked the door and opened it
cautiously.

A man walked quickly into the room: it was Miguel.  "I beg Your
Excellency's pardon," he said suavely, with that composure which always
strengthened his mean soul; "I am in need of a hiding-place."

"But your wound?" she said.

"A _ruse-de-guerre_; I wanted you to let me in.  Where can I hide?
They may be here soon."

"There on the roof, or in the observatory," she said pointing to the
other door.

"Do not tell them."

"Why should I?" she replied.  Calm though the man undoubtedly was, she
despised him; there was no dirt, she knew well, that he would not eat
if it suited his purpose to do so.

He went up and concealed himself on the roof under the big telescope.
Meanwhile she waited.  Emotions had succeeded each other so rapidly
that day in her heart that she felt incapable of further stress; a dull
feeling of pain remained, like the numbness and sense of injury after a
severe wound.  The firing receded towards the palace, and presently all
was comparatively silent in the city again.

At about nine o'clock the bell of the front-entrance rang; but she did
not dare to leave the room now that the door was broken down.  Then
after a while came the sound of people coming up-stairs.

"There is no lady here; the young lady went back the night before last
to her aunt's," said a voice.  It was the old woman's; with a bound of
joy and a passionate craving for the sympathy of her own sex, Lucile
rushed to the door and opened it.  Bettine was there, and with her an
officer of the rebel army, who handed a letter to her with these words:
"The President sends this to you, Madam."

"The President!"

"Of the Council of Public Safety."

The note merely informed her that the Government troops had been
repulsed and ended with the words: _Only one result is now possible,
and that will be attained in a few hours_.

The officer, saying that he would wait down-stairs in case she might
wish to send an answer, left the room.  Lucile pulled the old nurse
inside the door and embraced her, weeping.  Where had she been all that
terrible night?  Bettine had been in the cellar.  It seemed that
Savrola had thought of her as of everything; he had told her to take
her bed down there, and had even had the place carpeted and furnished
on the preceding afternoon.  There she had remained as he had told her.
Her perfect trust in her idol had banished all fears on her own
account, but she had "fidgeted terribly" about him.  He was all she had
in the world; others dissipate their affections on a husband, children,
brothers, and sisters; all the love of her kind old heart was centred
in the man she had fostered since he was a helpless baby.  And he did
not forget.  She displayed with pride a slip of paper, bearing the
words, _Safe and well_.

There was now a subdued sound of firing, from the direction of the
palace, which continued throughout the morning; but Miguel, seeing that
the streets were again quiet, emerged from his concealment and
re-entered the room.  "I want to see the President," he said.

"My husband?" asked Lucile.

"No, Your Excellency, Señor Savrola."  Miguel was quick in adapting
himself to circumstances.

Lucile thought of the officer; she mentioned him to Miguel.  "He will
take you to the Mayoralty."

The Secretary was delighted; he ran down-stairs and they saw him no
more.

The old nurse, with a practical soul, busied herself about getting
breakfast.  Lucile, to divert her thoughts, aided her, and soon--such
is our composition--found comfort in eggs and bacon.  They were
relieved to find that a picket had again been posted at the
street-door.  Bettine discovered this, for Lucile, her mood unchanged,
would not look into the street where she had seen such grim spectacles.
And she did right, for though the barricade was now deserted, nearly
twenty objects that had a few hours before been men, lay around or upon
it.  But about eleven some labourers arrived with two scavengers'
carts; and soon only the bloodstains on the pavement showed that there
had been any destruction other than that of property.

The morning wore slowly and anxiously away.  The firing near the palace
was continual, but distant.  Sometimes it swelled into a dull roar, at
others the individual shots sounded in a sort of quick rattle.  At
last, at about half-past two, it stopped abruptly.  Lucile trembled.
The quarrel had been decided, one way or the other.  Her mind refused
to face all the possibilities.  At times she clung in passionate fear
to the old nurse, who tried in vain to soothe her; at others she joined
her in the household tasks, or submitted to tasting the various meals
which the poor old soul prepared for her in the hopes of killing care
with comfort.

The ominous silence that followed the cessation of the firing did not
last long.  It was while Lucile was being coaxed by Bettine to eat some
custard-pudding that she had made on purpose for her, that the report
of the first great gun reached them.  The tremendous explosion, though
a long way off, made the windows rattle.  She shuddered.  What was
this?  She had hoped that all was over; but one explosion succeeded
another, until the thunder of a cannonade from the harbour almost
drowned their voices.  It was a weary waiting for the two women.




CHAPTER XIX.

AN EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCE.

Lieutenant Tiro reached the Mayoralty in safety, for though the streets
were full of excited people, they were peaceful citizens, and on his
proclaiming that he had been sent to see Savrola they allowed him to
pass.  The Municipal building was a magnificent structure of white
stone, elaborately decorated with statuary and sculpture.  In front of
it, surrounded by iron railings and accessible by three gateways,
stretched a wide courtyard, in which a great fountain, encircled by the
marble figures of departed civic magnates, played continually with
agreeable effect.  The whole edifice was worthy of the riches and
splendour of the Lauranian capital.

Two sentries of the rebel forces stood on guard with fixed bayonets at
the central gateway, and allowed none to enter without due authority.
Messengers were hurrying across the courtyard incessantly, and
orderlies coming or going at a gallop.  Without the gates a large
crowd, for the most part quiet, though greatly agitated, filled the
broad thoroughfare.  Wild rumours circulated at random in the mass and
the excitement was intense.  The sound of distant firing was distinct
and continuous.

Tiro made his way through the crowd without much difficulty, but found
his path blocked by the sentries at the gateway.  They refused to allow
him to proceed, and for a moment he feared that he had run his risks in
vain.  Luckily, however, he was recognised as Molara's aide-de-camp by
one of the Municipal attendants who were loitering in the courtyard.
He wrote his name on a piece of paper and requested the man to take it
to Savrola or, as he was now styled, the President of the Council of
Public Safety.  The servant departed, and after ten minutes returned
with an officer, resplendent with the red sash of the Revolutionary
party, who bade the Subaltern follow him forthwith.

The hall of the Mayoralty was full of excited and voluble patriots who
were eager to serve the cause of Liberty, if it could be done without
risking their lives.  They all wore red sashes and talked loudly,
discussing the despatches from the fight which arrived by frequent
messengers and were posted on the walls.  Tiro and his guide passed
through the hall and hurrying along a passage arrived at the entrance
of a small committee-room.  Several ushers and messengers stood around
it; an officer was on duty outside.  He opened the door and announced
the Subaltern.

"Certainly," said a well-known voice, and Tiro entered.  It was a
small, wainscotted apartment with two tall and deeply set glazed
windows shaded by heavy, faded curtains of reddish hue.  Savrola was
writing at a table in the middle of the room; Godoy and Renos were
talking near one of the windows; another man, whom for the moment he
did not recognise, was busily scribbling in the corner.  The great
Democrat looked up.

"Good-morning, Tiro," he said cheerily, then, seeing the serious and
impatient look on the boy's face, he asked him what had happened.  Tiro
told him quickly of the President's wish to surrender the palace.
"Well," said Savrola, "Moret is there, and he has full powers."

"He is dead."

"How?" asked Savrola, in a low pained voice.

"Shot in the throat," replied the Subaltern laconically.

Savrola had turned very white; he was fond of Moret and they had long
been friends.  A feeling of disgust at the whole struggle came over
him; he repressed it; this was no time for regrets.  "You mean that the
crowd will accept no surrender?"

"I mean they have probably massacred them all by now."

"What time was Moret killed?"

"A quarter-past twelve."

Savrola took up a paper that lay beside him on the table.  "This was
sent off at half-past twelve."

Tiro looked at it.  It was signed _Moret_ and ran as follows: _Am
preparing for final assault.  All well_.

"It is a forgery," said the Subaltern simply.  "I started myself before
the half-hour, and Señor Moret had been dead ten minutes then.
Somebody has assumed the command."

"By Jove," said Savrola getting up from the table.  "Kreutze!"  He
caught up his hat and cane.  "Come on; he will most certainly murder
Molara, and probably the others, if he is not stopped.  I must go there
myself."

"What?" said Renos.  "Most irregular; your place is here."

"Send an officer," suggested Godoy.

"I have none to send of sufficient power with the people, unless you
will go yourself."

"I!  No, certainly not!  I would not think of it," said Godoy quickly.
"It would be useless; I have no authority over the mob."

"That is not quite the tone you have adopted all the morning," replied
Savrola quietly, "or at least since the Government attack was
repulsed."  Then turning to Tiro, he said, "Let us start."

They were leaving the room when the Subaltern saw that the man who had
been writing in the corner was looking at him.  To his astonishment he
recognised Miguel.

The Secretary bowed satirically.  "Here we are again," he said; "you
were wise to follow."

"You insult me," said Tiro with profound contempt.  "Rats leave a
sinking ship."

"The wiser they," rejoined the Secretary; "they could do no good by
staying.  I have always heard that aides-de-camp are the first to leave
a fight."

"You are a damned dirty dog," said the Subaltern falling back on a
rudimentary form of repartee with which he was more familiar.

"I can wait no longer," said Savrola in a voice that was a plain
command.  Tiro obeyed, and they left the room.

Walking down the passage and through the hall, where Savrola was loudly
cheered, they reached the entrance, where a carriage was waiting.  A
dozen mounted men, with red sashes and rifles, ranged themselves about
it as an escort.  The crowd outside the gates, seeing the great leader
and hearing the applause within, raised a shout.  Savrola turned to the
commander of the escort.  "I need no guard," he said; "that is
necessary only for tyrants.  I will go alone."  The escort fell back.
The two men entered the carriage and, drawn by strong horses, passed
out into the streets.

"You dislike Miguel?" asked Savrola after a while.

"He is a traitor."

"There are plenty about the city.  Now I suppose you would call me a
traitor."

"Ah! but you have always been one," replied Tiro bluntly.  Savrola gave
a short laugh.  "I mean," continued the other, "that you have always
been trying to upset things."

"I have been loyal to my treachery," suggested Savrola.

"Yes,--we have always been at war with you; but this viper----"

"Well," said Savrola, "you must take men as you find them; few are
disinterested.  The viper, as you call him, is a poor creature; but he
saved my life, and asked me to save his in return.  What could I do?
Besides he is of use.  He knows the exact state of the public finances
and is acquainted with the details of the foreign policy.  What are we
stopping for?"

Tiro looked out.  The street was closed by a barricade which made it a
_cul-de-sac_.  "Try the next turning," he said to the coachman; "go on
quickly."  The noise of the firing could now be distinctly heard.  "We
very nearly pulled it off this morning," said Tiro.

"Yes," answered Savrola; "they told me the attack was repulsed with
difficulty."

"Where were you?" asked the boy in great astonishment.

"At the Mayoralty, asleep; I was very tired."

Tiro was conscious of an irresistible feeling of disgust.  So he was a
coward, this great man.  He had always heard that politicians took care
of their skins, and sent others to fight their battles.  Somehow he had
thought that Savrola was different: he knew such a lot about polo; but
he was the same as all the rest.

Savrola, ever quick to notice, saw his look and again laughed dryly.
"You think I ought to have been in the streets?  Believe me, I did more
good where I was.  If you had seen the panic and terror at the
Mayoralty during the fighting, you would have recognised that there
were worse things to do than to go to sleep in confidence.  Besides,
everything in human power had been done; and we had not miscalculated."

Tiro remained unconvinced.  His good opinion of Savrola was destroyed.
He had heard much of this man's political courage.  The physical always
outweighed the moral in his mind.  He felt reluctantly convinced that
he was a mere word-spinner, brave enough where speeches were concerned,
but careful when sterner work was to be done.

The carriage stopped again.  "All these streets are barricaded, Sir,"
said the coach-man.

Savrola looked out of the window.  "We are close there, let us walk; it
is only half a mile across Constitution Square."  He jumped out.  The
barricade was deserted, as were the streets in this part of the town.
Most of the violent rebels were attacking the palace, and the peaceable
citizens were in their houses or outside the Mayoralty.

They scrambled over the rough wail, which was made of paving-stones and
sacks of earth piled under and upon two waggons, and hurried down the
street beyond.  It led to the great square of the city.  At the further
end was the Parliament House, with the red flag of revolt flying from
its tower.  An entrenchment had been dug in front of the entrance, and
the figures of some of the rebel soldiery were visible on it.

They had gone about a quarter of the distance across the square, when
suddenly, from the entrenchment or barricade three hundred yards away,
there darted a puff of smoke; five or six more followed in quick
succession.  Savrola paused, astonished, but the Subaltern understood
at once.  "Run for it!" he cried.  "The statue,--there is cover behind
it."

Savrola began to run as fast as he could.  The firing from the
barricade continued.  He heard two sucking kisses in the air; something
struck the pavement in front of him so that the splinters flew, and
while he passed a grey smudge appeared; there was a loud _tang_ on the
area-railings beside him; the dust of the roadway sprang up in several
strange spurts.  As he ran, the realisation of what these things meant
grew stronger; but the distance was short and he reached the statue
alive.  Behind its massive pedestal there was ample shelter for both.

"They fired at us."

"They did," replied Tiro.  "Damn them!"

"But why?"

"My uniform--devilry--running man--good fun, you know--for them."

"We must go on," said Savrola.

"We can't go on across the square."

"Which way, then?"

"We must work down the street away from them, keeping the statue
between us and their fire, and get up one of the streets to the left."

A main street ran through the centre of the great square, and led out
of it at right angles to the direction in which they were proceeding.
It was possible to retire down this under cover of the statue, and to
take a parallel street further along.  This would enable them to avoid
the fire from the entrenchment, or would at least reduce the dangerous
space to a few yards.  Savrola looked in the direction Tiro indicated.
"Surely this is shorter," he said pointing across the square.

"Much shorter," answered the Subaltern; "in about three seconds it will
take you to another world."

Savrola rose.  "Come on," he said; "I do not allow such considerations
to affect my judgment.  The lives of men are at stake; the time is
short.  Besides, this is an educational experience."

The blood was in his cheeks and his eyes sparkled; all that was
reckless in him, all his love of excitement, stirred in his veins.
Tiro looked at him amazed.  Brave as he was, he saw no pleasure in
rushing to his death at the heels of a mad politician; but he allowed
no man to show him the way.  He said no more, but drew back to the far
end of the pedestal, so as to gain pace, and then bounded into the open
and ran as fast as he could run.

How he got across he never knew.  One bullet cut the peak of his cap,
another tore his trousers.  He had seen many men killed in action, and
anticipated the fearful blow that would bring him down with a smash on
the pavement.  Instinctively he raised his left arm as if to shield his
face.  At length he reached safety, breathless and incredulous.  Then
he looked back.  Half way across was Savrola, walking steadily and
drawn up to his full height.  Thirty yards away he stopped and, taking
off his felt hat, waved it in defiance at the distant barricade.  Tiro
saw him start as he lifted his arm, and his hat fell to the ground.  He
did not pick it up, and in a moment was beside him, his face pale, his
teeth set, every muscle rigid.  "Now tell me," he said, "do you call
that a hot fire?"

"You are mad," replied the Subaltern.

"Why, may I ask?"

"What is the use of throwing away your life, of waiting to taunt them?"

"Ah," he answered, much excited, "I waved my hat in the face of Fate,
not at those wretched irresponsible animals.  Now to the palace;
perhaps we are already too late."

They hurried on through the deserted streets with the sound of musketry
growing ever louder, and mingling with it now the shouts and yells of a
crowd.  As they approached the scene they passed through groups of
people, peaceful citizens for the most part, anxiously looking towards
the tumult.  Several glanced fiercely at the soldier whose uniform made
him conspicuous; but many took off their hats to Savrola.  A long
string of stretchers, each with a pale, shattered figure on it, passed
by, filing slowly away from the fight.  The press became thicker, and
arms were now to be seen on all sides.  Mutinous soldiers still in
their uniforms, workmen in blouses, others in the dress of the National
Militia, and all wearing the red sash of the revolt, filled the street.
But Savrola's name had spread before him and the crowd divided, with
cheers, to give him passage.

Suddenly the firing in front ceased, and for a space there was silence,
followed by a ragged spluttering volley and a low roar from many
throats.

"It's all over," said the Subaltern.

"Faster!" cried Savrola.




CHAPTER XX.

THE END OF THE QUARREL.

About a quarter of an hour after Lieutenant Tiro had escaped along the
telegraph-wires, the attack on the palace was renewed with vigour.  It
seemed, moreover, that the rebels had found a new leader, for they
displayed considerable combination in their tactics.  The firing
increased on all sides.  Then, under cover of their musketry, the enemy
debouched simultaneously from several streets, and, rushing down the
great avenue, delivered a general assault.  The garrison fired steadily
and with effect, but there were not enough bullets to stop the
advancing crowds.  Many fell, but the rest pressed on impetuously and
found shelter under the wall of the courtyard.  The defenders,
realising they could no longer hold this outer line of defence, fell
back to the building itself, where they maintained themselves among the
great pillars of the entrance, and for some time held the enemy's fire
in check by shooting accurately at all those who put their heads over
the wall or exposed themselves.  Gradually, however, the rebels, by
their great numbers, gained the supremacy in the fire-fight, and the
defenders in their turn found it dangerous to show themselves to shoot.

The musketry of the attack grew heavier, while that of the defence
dwindled.  The assailants now occupied the whole of the outer wall, and
at length completely silenced the fire of the surviving adherents of
the Government.  Twenty rifles were discharged at any head that showed;
yet they showed a prudent respect for these determined men, and gave no
chances away.  Under cover of their fire, and of the courtyard wall,
they brought up the field-gun with which the gate had been broken in,
and from a range of a hundred yards discharged it at the palace.  The
shell smashed through the masonry, and burst in the great hall.
Another followed, passing almost completely through the building and
exploding in the breakfast-room on the further side.  The curtains,
carpets, and chairs caught fire and began to burn briskly; it was
evident that the defence of the palace was drawing to a close.

Sorrento, who had long schooled himself to look upon all events of war
from a purely professional standpoint, and who boasted that the
military operation he preferred above all others was the organising of
a rearguard from a defeated army, felt that nothing further could be
done.  He approached the President.

Molara stood in the great hall where he had lived and ruled for five
years with a bitter look of despair upon his face.  The mosaic of the
pavement was ripped and scored by the iron splinters of the shells;
great fragments of the painted roof had fallen to the ground; the
crimson curtains were smouldering; the broken glass of the windows lay
on the floor, and heavy clouds of smoke were curling in from the
further side of the palace.  The President's figure and expression
accorded well with the scene of ruin and destruction.

Sorrento saluted with much ceremony.  He had only his military code to
believe in, and he took firm hold of that.  "Owing, Sir," he began
officially, "to the rebels having brought a gun into action at close
range, it is my duty to inform you that this place has now become
untenable.  It will be necessary to capture the gun by a charge, and
expel the enemy from the courtyard."

The President knew what he meant; they should rush out and die
fighting.  The agony of the moment was intense; the actual dread of
death was increased by the sting of unsatisfied revenge; he groaned
aloud.

Suddenly a loud shout arose from the crowd.  They had seen the smoke of
the fire and knew that the end was at hand.  "Molara, Molara, come out!
Dictator," they cried, "come out or burn!"

It often happens that, when men are convinced that they have to die, a
desire to bear themselves well and to leave life's stage with dignity
conquers all other sensations.  Molara remembered that, after all, he
had lived famous among men.  He had been almost a king.  All the eyes
of the world would be turned to the scene about to be enacted; distant
countries would know, distant ages would reflect.  It was worth while
dying bravely, since die he must.

He called his last defenders around him.  There were but thirty left,
and of these some were wounded.  "Gentlemen," he said, "you have been
faithful to the end; I will demand no more sacrifices of you.  My death
may appease those wild beasts.  I give you back your allegiance, and
authorise you to surrender."

"Never!" said Sorrento.

"It is a military order, Sir," answered the President, and walked
towards the door.  He stepped through the shattered woodwork and out on
the broad flight of steps.  The courtyard was filled with the crowd.
Molara advanced until he had descended half way; then he paused.  "Here
I am," he said.  The crowd stared.  For a moment he stood there in the
bright sunlight.  His dark blue uniform-coat, on which the star of
Laurania and many orders and decorations of foreign countries
glittered, was open, showing his white shirt beneath it.  He was
bare-headed and drew himself up to his full height.  For a while there
was silence.

Then from all parts of the courtyard, from the wall that overlooked it
and even from the windows of the opposite houses, a ragged fusilade
broke out.  The President's head jerked forward, his legs shot from
under him and he fell to the ground, quite limp.  The body rolled down
two or three steps and lay twitching feebly.  A man in a dark suit of
clothes, and who apparently exercised authority over the crowd,
advanced towards it.  Presently there was a single shot.

At the same moment Savrola and his companion, stepping through the
broken gateway, entered the courtyard.  The mob gave passage readily,
but in a sullen and guilty silence.

"Keep close to me," said Savrola to the Subaltern.  He walked straight
towards the steps which were not as yet invaded by the rebel soldiery.
The officers among the pillars had, with the cessation of the firing,
begun to show themselves; someone waved a handkerchief.

"Gentlemen," cried Savrola in a loud voice, "I call upon you to
surrender.  Your lives shall be spared."

Sorrento stepped forward.  "By the orders of His Excellency I surrender
the palace and the Government troops who have defended it.  I do so on
a promise that their lives shall be safe."

"Certainly," said Savrola.  "Where is the President?"  Sorrento pointed
to the other side of the steps.  Savrola turned and walked towards the
spot.

Antonio Molara, sometime President of the Republic of Laurania, lay on
the three lowest steps of the entrance of his palace, head downwards; a
few yards away in a ring stood the people he had ruled.  A man in a
black suit was reloading his revolver; it was Karl Kreutze, the Number
One of the Secret Society.  The President had bled profusely from
several bullet-wounds in the body, but it was evident that the _coup de
grâce_ had been administered by a shot in the head.  The back and left
side of the skull behind the ear was blown away, and the force of the
explosion, probably at close quarters, had cracked all the bones of the
face so that as the skin was whole, it looked like broken china in a
sponge bag.

Savrola stopped aghast.  He looked at the crowd, and they shrank from
his eye; gradually they shuffled back, leaving the sombre-clad man
alone face to face with the great Democrat.  A profound hush overspread
the whole mass of men.  "Who has committed this murder?" he asked in
low hoarse tones, fixing his glance on the head of the Secret Society.

"It is not a murder," replied the man doggedly; "it is an execution."

"By whose authority?"

"In the name of the Society."

When Savrola had seen the body of his enemy, he was stricken with
horror, but at the same time a dreadful joy convulsed his heart; the
barrier was now removed.  He struggled to repress the feeling, and of
the struggle anger was born.  Kreutze's words infuriated him.  A sense
of maddening irritation shook his whole system.  All this must fall on
his name; what would Europe think, what would the world say?  Remorse,
shame, pity, and the wicked joy he tried to crush, all fused into
reckless ungovernable passion.  "Vile scum!" he cried, and stepping
down he slashed the other across the face with his cane.

The man sprang at his throat on the sudden impulse of intense pain.
But Lieutenant Tiro had drawn his sword; with a strong arm and a hearty
good will he met him with all the sweep of a downward cut, and rolled
him on the ground.

The spring was released, and the fury of the populace broke out.  A
loud shout arose.  Great as was Savrola's reputation among the
Revolutionaries, these men had known other and inferior leaders more
intimately.  Karl Kreutze was a man of the people.  His socialistic
writings had been widely read; as the head of the Secret Society he had
certain assured influences to support him, and he had conducted the
latter part of the attack on the palace.  Now he had been destroyed
before their eyes by one of the hated officers.  The crowd surged
forward shouting in savage anger.

Savrola sprang backwards up the steps.  "Citizens, listen to me!" he
cried.  "You have won a victory; do not disgrace it.  Your valour and
patriotism have triumphed; do not forget that it is for our ancient
Constitution that you have fought."  He was interrupted by shouts and
jeers.

"What have I done?" he rejoined.  "As much as any here.  I too have
risked my life in the great cause.  Is there a man here that has a
wound?  Let him stand forth, for we are comrades."  And for the first
time, with a proud gesture, he lifted his left arm.  Tiro perceived the
reason of the start he had given when running the gauntlet in
Constitution Square.  The sleeve of his coat was torn and soaked with
blood; the linen of his shirt protruded crimson; his fingers were stiff
and smeared all over.

The impression produced was tremendous.  The mob, to whom the dramatic
always appeals with peculiar force, were also swayed by that sympathy
which all men feel for those injured in a common danger.  A revulsion
took place.  A cheer, faint, at first, but growing louder, rose; others
outside the courtyard, ignorant of the reason, took it up.  Savrola
continued.

"Our State, freed from tyranny, must start fair and unsullied.  Those
who have usurped undue authority, not derived from the people, shall be
punished, whether they be presidents or citizens.  These military
officers must come before the judges of the Republic and answer for
their actions.  A free trial is the right of all Lauranians.  Comrades,
much has been done, but we have not finished yet.  We have exalted
Liberty; it remains to preserve her.  These officers shall be lodged in
prison; for you there is other work.  The ships are coming back; it is
not yet time to put away the rifles.  Who is there will see the matter
through,--to the end?"

A man, with a bloodstained bandage round his head, stepped forward.
"We are comrades," he cried; "shake hands."

Savrola gripped him.  He was one of the subordinate officers in the
rebel army, a simple honest man whom Savrola had known slightly for
several months.  "I entrust a high duty to you.  Conduct these officers
and soldiers to the State Prison; I will send full instructions by a
mounted messenger.  Where can you find an escort?"  There was no lack
of volunteers.  "To the Prison then, and remember that the faith of the
Republic depends on their safety.  Forward, Gentlemen," he added,
turning to the surviving defenders of the palace; "your lives are safe,
upon my honour."

"The honour of a conspirator," sneered Sorrento.

"As you like, Sir, but obey."

The party, Tiro alone remaining with Savrola, moved off, surrounded and
followed by many of the crowd.  While they did so a dull heavy boom
came up from the sea-front; another and another followed in quick
succession.  The fleet had returned at last.




CHAPTER XXI.

THE RETURN OF THE FLEET.

Admiral de Mello had been true to his word, and had obeyed the order
which had reached him through the proper channel.  He was within a
hundred miles of Port Said when the despatch-boat, with the Agent of
the Republic, had been met.  He at once changed his course, and steamed
towards the city he had so lately left.  His fleet consisted of two
battleships, which, though slow and out of date, were yet formidable
machines, two cruisers, and a gunboat.  The inopportune bursting of a
steam-pipe on board the flagship, the _Fortuna_, caused a delay of
several hours, and it was not till two o'clock in the afternoon of the
second day that he rounded the point and saw the harbour and city of
Laurania rise fair and white on the starboard bow.  His officers
scanned the capital, which was their home and of whose glories they
were proud, with anxious eyes; nor were their fears unfounded.  The
smoke of half a dozen conflagrations rose from among the streets and
gardens; the foreign shipping had moved out of the basin and lay off in
the roads, for the most part under steam; a strange red flag flew from
the fort at the end of the mole.

The Admiral, signalling for half-speed, picked his way towards the
mouth of the channel cautiously.  It was so contrived that a vessel in
passing must be exposed to a cross-fire from the heavy guns in the
batteries.  The actual passage was nearly a mile wide, but the
navigable channel itself was dangerously narrow and extremely
difficult.  De Mello, who knew every foot of it, led the way in the
_Fortuna_; the two cruisers, _Sorato_ and _Petrarch_, followed; the
gunboat _Rienzi_ was next, and the other battleship, _Saldanho_,
brought up the rear.  The signal was made to clear for action; the men
were beat to quarters; the officers went to their posts, and the fleet,
assisted by a favourable tide, steamed slowly towards the entrance.

The rebel gunners wasted no time in formalities.  As the _Fortuna_ came
into the line of fire, two great bulges of smoke sprang from the
embrasures; the nine-inch guns of the seaward battery were discharged.
Both shells flew high and roared through the masts of the warship, who
increased her speed to seven knots and stood on her course followed by
her consorts.  As each gun of the forts came to bear, it was fired, but
the aim was bad, and the projectiles ricochetted merrily over the
water, raising great fountains of spray, and it was not until the
leading ship had arrived at the entrance of the channel, that she was
struck.

A heavy shell, charged with a high explosive, crashed into the
port-battery of the _Fortuna_, killing and wounding nearly sixty men,
as well as dismounting two out of the four guns.  This roused the huge
machine; the forward turret revolved and, turning swiftly towards the
fort, brought its great twin guns to bear.  Their discharge was almost
simultaneous, and the whole ship staggered with the violence of the
recoil.  Both shells struck the fort and exploded on impact, smashing
the masonry to splinters and throwing heaps of earth into the air; but
the harm done was slight.  Safe in their bomb-proofs, the rebel gunners
were exposed only to the danger of missiles entering the embrasures;
while such guns as fired from _barbette_ mountings were visible only at
the moment of discharge.

Nevertheless the great ship began literally to spout flame in all
directions, and her numerous quick-firing guns searched for the
embrasures, sprinkling their small shells with prodigal rapidity.
Several of these penetrated, and the rebels began to lose men.  As the
ships advanced, the cross-fire grew hotter, and each in succession
replied furiously.  The cannonade became tremendous, the loud
explosions of the heavy guns being almost drowned by the incessant
rattle of the quick firers; the waters of the harbour were spotted all
over with great spouts of foam, while the clear air showed the white
smoke-puffs of the bursting shells.  The main battery of the _Fortuna_
was completely silenced.  A second shell had exploded with a horrid
slaughter, and the surviving sailors had fled from the scene to the
armoured parts of the vessel; nor could their officers induce them to
return to that fearful shambles, where the fragments of their comrades
lay crushed between masses of senseless iron.  The sides of the ships
were scored and torn all over, and the copious streams of water from
the scuppers attested the energy of the pumps.  The funnel of the
_Fortuna_ had been shot off almost level with the deck, and the clouds
of black smoke floating across her quarters drove the gunners from the
stern-turret and from the after-guns.  Broken, dismantled, crowded with
dead and dying, her vitals were still uninjured, and her captain, in
the conning tower, feeling that she still answered the helm, rejoiced
in his good fortune and held on his course.

The cruiser _Petrarch_ had her steam steering-gear twisted and jammed
by a shell, and becoming unmanageable grounded on a sand-bank.  The
forts, redoubling their fire, began to smash her to pieces.  She
displayed a white flag and stopped firing: but of this no notice was
taken, and as the other ships dared not risk going ashore in helping
her, she became a wreck and blew up at three o'clock with a prodigious
report.

The _Saldanho_, who suffered least and was very heavily armoured,
contrived to shelter the gunboat a good deal, and the whole fleet
passed the batteries after forty minutes' fighting and with a loss of
two hundred and twenty men killed and wounded, exclusive of the entire
crew of the _Petrarch_, who were all destroyed.  The rebel loss was
about seventy, and the damage done to the forts was slight.  But it was
now the turn of the sailors.  The city of Laurania was at their mercy.

The Admiral brought his ships to anchor five hundred yards from the
shore.  He hoisted a flag of truce, and as all his boats had been
smashed in running the gauntlet, he signalled to the Custom-House that
he was anxious for a parley, and desired that an officer should be sent.

After about an hour's delay, a launch put out from the jetty and ran
alongside the _Fortuna_.  Two rebel officers in the uniform of the
Republican Militia, and with red sashes round their waists, came on
board.  De Mello received them on his battered quarter-deck, with
extreme politeness.  Rough sailor as he was, he had mixed with men of
many lands, and his manners were invariably improved by the proximity
of danger or the consciousness of power.  "May I ask," he said, "to
what we are indebted for this welcome to our native city?"

The senior of the two officers replied that the forts had not fired
till they were fired upon.  The Admiral did not argue the point, but
asked what had happened in the city.  On hearing of the Revolution and
of the death of the President, he was deeply moved.  Like Sorrento, he
had known Molara for many years, and he was an honest, open-hearted
man.  The officers continued that the Provisional Government would
accept his surrender and that of his ships, and would admit him and his
officers to honourable terms as prisoners of war.  He produced the
authorisation of the Committee of Public Safety, signed by Savrola.

De Mello somewhat scornfully requested him to be serious.

The officer pointed out that the fleet in its battered condition could
not again run the gauntlet of the batteries and would be starved out.

To this De Mello replied that the forts at the head of the harbour were
in like condition, as his guns now commanded both the approaches by the
military mole and the promontory.  He also stated that he had six
weeks' provisions on board and added that he thought he had sufficient
ammunition.

His advantage was not denied.  "Undoubtedly, Sir," said the officer,
"it is in your power to render great services to the Provisional
Government and to the cause of Liberty and Justice."

"At present," replied the Admiral dryly, "it is the cause of Justice
that appears to need my support."

To that the officers could find no more to say than that they had
fought for a free Parliament and meant to have their way.

The Admiral took a turn or two before replying.  "My terms are these,"
he said at last.  "The leader of the conspiracy--this man,
Savrola--must be surrendered at once and stand his trial for murder and
rebellion.  Until this has been done, I will not treat.  Unless this is
done by six o'clock to-morrow morning, I shall bombard the town and
shall continue to do so until my terms are complied with."

Both officers protested that this would be a barbarity, and hinted that
he would be made to answer for his shells.  The Admiral declined to
discuss the matter or to consider other terms.  As it was impossible to
move him, the officers returned to the shore in their launch.  It was
now four o'clock.

As soon as this _ultimatum_ was reported to the Committee of Public
Safety at the Mayoralty, something very like consternation ensued.  The
idea of a bombardment was repugnant to the fat burgesses who had joined
the party of revolt so soon as it had become obvious that it was the
winning side.  It was also distasteful to the Socialists who, however
much they might approve of the application of dynamite to others, did
not themselves relish the idea of a personal acquaintance with high
explosives.

The officers related their interview and the Admiral's demands.

"And if we refuse to comply?" inquired Savrola.

"Then he will open fire at six o'clock to-morrow morning."

"Well, Gentlemen, we shall have to grin and bear it.  They will not
dare to shoot away all their ammunition, and so soon as they see that
we are determined, they will give in.  Women and children will be safe
in the cellars, and it may be possible to bring some of the guns of the
forts to bear on the harbour."  There was no enthusiasm.  "It will be
an expensive game of bluff," he added.

"There is a cheaper way," said a Socialist delegate from the end of the
table, significantly.

"What do you propose?" asked Savrola looking hard at him; the man had
been a close ally of Kreutze.

"I say that it would be cheaper if the leader of the revolt were to
sacrifice himself for the sake of Society."

"That is your opinion; I will take the sense of the Committee on it."
There were cries of "No!  No!" and "Shame!" from many present.  Some
were silent; but it was evident that Savrola had the majority.  "Very
well," he said acidly; "the Committee of Public Safety do not propose
to adopt the honourable member's suggestion.  He is overruled,"--here
he looked hard at the man, who blenched,--"as he will frequently be
among people of civilised habits."

Another man got up from the end of the long table.  "Look here," he
said roughly; "if our city is at their mercy, we have hostages.  We
have thirty of these popinjays who fought us this morning; let us send
and tell the Admiral that we shall shoot one for every shell he fires."

There was a murmur of assent.  Many approved of the proposal, because
they thought that it need never be carried into execution, and all
wanted to prevent the shells.  Savrola's plan, however wise, was
painful.  It was evident that the new suggestion was a popular one.

"It is out of the question," said Savrola.

"Why?" asked several voices.

"Because, Sirs, these officers surrendered to terms, and because the
Republic does not butcher innocent men."

"Let us divide upon it," said the man.

"I protest against a division.  This is not a matter of debate or of
opinion; it is a matter of right and wrong."

"Nevertheless I am for voting."

"And I," "And I," "And I," shouted many voices.

The voting went forward.  Renos supported Savrola on legal grounds; the
case of the officers was now _sub judice_, so he said.  Godoy
abstained.  The majority in favour of the proposal was twenty-one to
seventeen.

The count of hands was received with cheering.  Savrola shrugged his
shoulders.  "It is impossible that this can go on.  Are we become
barbarians in a morning?"

"There is an alternative," said Kreutze's friend.

"There is, Sir; an alternative that I should gladly embrace before this
new plan was carried out.  But," in a low menacing tone, "the people
will be invited to pronounce an opinion first, and I may have an
opportunity of showing them their real enemies and mine."

The man made no reply to the obvious threat; like all the others he
stood in considerable awe of Savrola's power with the mob and of his
strong dominating character.  The silence was broken by Godoy, who said
that the matter had been settled by the Committee.  A note was
therefore drafted and despatched to the Admiral, informing him that the
military prisoners would be shot should he bombard the city.  After
further discussion the Committee broke up.

Savrola remained behind, watching the members move slowly away talking
as they went.  Then he rose and entered the small room he had used as
his office.  His spirits were low.  Slight as it was, his wound hurt
him; but worse than that, he was conscious that there were hostile
influences at work; he was losing his hold over the Party.  While
victory was still in the balance he had been indispensable; now they
were prepared to go on alone.  He thought of all he had gone through
that day; the terrible scene of the night, the excitement and anxiety
while the fighting was going on, the strange experience in the square,
and, last of all, this grave matter.  His mind, however, was made up.
He knew enough of De Mello to guess what his answer would be.  "They
are soldiers," he would say; "they must give their lives if necessary.
No prisoner should allow his friends to be compromised on his account.
They should not have surrendered."  When the bombardment began he could
imagine fear turning to cruelty, and the crowd carrying out the threat
that their leaders had made.  Whatever happened, the affair could not
be allowed to continue.

He rang the bell.  "Ask the Secretary to come here," he said to the
attendant.  The man departed, and in a few moments returned with
Miguel.  "What officer has charge of the prison?"

"I don't think the officials have been altered; they have taken no part
in the Revolution."

"Well, write an order to the Governor to send the prisoners of war, the
military officers taken this afternoon, in closed carriages to the
railway station.  They must be there at ten o'clock to-night."

"Are you going to release them?" asked Miguel opening his eyes.

"I am going to send them to a place of security," answered Savrola
ambiguously.

Miguel began to write the order without further comment.  Savrola took
the telephone off the table and rang up the railway-station.  "Tell the
traffic-manager to come and speak to me.  Are you there?--The President
of the Executive Committee of the Council of Public Safety--do you
hear?  Have a special train,--accommodation for thirty--ready to start
at ten p.m.  Clear the line to the frontier,--yes,--right to the
frontier."

Miguel looked up from his writing quickly, but said nothing.  Although
he had deserted the President when he saw that he was ruined and his
cause lost, he hated Savrola with a genuine hatred.  An idea came into
his head.




CHAPTER XXII.

LIFE'S COMPENSATIONS.

Much had happened, though but a few hours had passed since Savrola left
his house to hurry to the Mayoralty.  The deep and intricate
conspiracy, which had been growing silently and in secret for so many
months, had burst on the world's stage and electrified the nations.
All Europe had learned with amazement of the sudden and terrible
convulsion that in a few hours had overthrown the Government which had
existed for five years in Laurania.  In the fighting that had raged
throughout the ninth of September upwards of fourteen hundred persons
had been killed and wounded.  The damage done to property had been
enormous.  The Senate-House was in flames; the palace had been
destroyed; both, together with many shops and private houses, had been
looted by the mob and the mutineers.  Fires were still smouldering in
several parts of the city; in many homes there were empty places and
weeping women; in the streets the ambulances and municipal carts were
collecting the corpses.  It had been a momentous day in the annals of
the State.

And all through the terrible hours Lucile had waited, listening to the
sound of the musketry, which, sometimes distant and fitful, sometimes
near and sustained, suggested the voice of a wrathful giant, now sunk
in sulky grumblings, now raised in loud invective.  She had listened in
sorrow and suspense, till it was lost in the appalling din of the
cannonade.  At intervals, between the bathos of the material
consolations of the old nurse,--soup, custards, and the like--she had
prayed.  Until four o'clock, when she had received a message from
Savrola acquainting her with the tragedy at the palace, she had not
dared to add a name to her appeals; but thenceforward she implored a
merciful Providence to save the life of the man she loved.  Molara she
did not mourn: terrible and cruel as was his death, she could not feel
she had suffered loss; but the idea that he had been killed on her
account filled her heart with a dreadful fear of guilt.  If that were
so, she said to herself, one barrier was removed only to be replaced by
another.  But the psychologist might cynically aver that force and
death were the only obstacles that would restrain her affection for
Savrola, for above all she prayed for his return, that she might not be
left alone in the world.

Her love seemed all that was left to her now, but with it life was more
real and strongly coloured than in the cold days at the palace amid
splendour, power, and admiration.  She had found what she had lacked,
and so had he.  With her it was as if the rising sunbeam had struck the
rainbow from the crystal prism, or flushed the snow peak with rose,
orange, and violet.  With Savrola, in the fierce glow of love the
steady blue-white fires of ambition had become invisible.  The human
soul is subjected to many refining agents in the world's crucible.  He
was sensible of a change of mood and thought; no longer would he wave
his hat at Fate; to his courage he had now added caution.  From the
moment when he had seen that poor, hideous figure lying on the steps of
the palace, he had felt the influence of other forces in his life.
Other interests, other hopes, other aspirations had entered his mind.
He searched for different ideals and a new standard of happiness.

Very worn and very weary he made his way to his rooms.  The strain of
the preceding twenty-four hours had been tremendous, and the anxieties
which he felt for the future were keen.  The step he had taken in
overruling the Council and sending the prisoners into foreign territory
was one the results of which he could not quite estimate.  It was, he
was convinced, the only course; and for the consequences he did not
greatly care, so far as he himself was concerned.  He thought of
Moret,--poor, brave, impetuous Moret, who would have set the world
right in a day.  The loss of such a friend had been a severe one to
him, privately and politically.  Death had removed the only
disinterested man, the only one on whom he could lean in the hour of
need.  A sense of weariness, of disgust with struggling, of desire for
peace filled his soul.  The object for which he had toiled so long was
now nearly attained and it seemed of little worth, of little
comparative worth, that is to say, beside Lucile.

As a Revolutionist he had long made such arrangements with his property
as to make sure of a competence in another land, if he had to fly
Laurania; and a strong wish to leave that scene of strife and carnage
and to live with the beautiful woman who loved him took possession of
his mind.  It was, however, his first duty to establish a government in
the place of that he had overthrown.  Yet when he reflected on the
cross-grained delegates, the mean pandering crowd of office-seekers,
the weak, distrustful, timid colleagues, he hardly felt that he cared
to try; so great was the change that a few hours had worked in this
determined and aspiring man.

Lucile rose to meet him as he entered.  Fate had indeed driven them
together, for she had no other hope in life, nor was there anyone to
whom she could turn for help.  Yet she looked at him with terror.

His quick mind guessed her doubt.  "I tried to save him," he said; "but
I was too late, though I was wounded in taking a short cut there."

She saw his bandaged arm, and looked at him with love.  "Do you despise
me very much?" she asked.

"No," he replied; "I would not marry a goddess."

"Nor I," she said, "a philosopher."

Then they kissed each other, and thenceforward their relationship was
simple.

But in spite of the labours of the day Savrola had no time for rest.
There was much to do, and, like all men who have to work at a terrible
pressure for a short period, he fell back on the resources of medicine.
He went to a little cabinet in the corner of the room and poured
himself out a potent drug, something that would dispense with sleep and
give him fresh energy and endurance.  Then he sat down and began to
write orders and instructions and to sign the pile of papers he had
brought with him from the Mayoralty.  Lucile, seeing him thus employed,
betook herself to her room.

It was about one o'clock in the morning when there came a ringing at
the bell.  Savrola, mindful of the old nurse, ran down and opened the
door himself.  Tiro, in plain clothes, entered.  "I have come to warn
you," he said.

"Of what?"

"Someone has informed the Council that you have released the prisoners.
They have summoned an urgency meeting.  Do you think you can hold them?"

"The devil!" said Savrola pensively.  Then after a pause he added, "I
will go and join them."

"There are stages laid by road to the frontier," said the Subaltern.
"The President made me arrange them in case he should wish to send Her
Excellency away.  If you decide to give up the game you can escape by
these; they will hold them to my warrant."

"No," said Savrola.  "It is good of you to think of it; but I have
saved this people from tyranny and must now try to save them from
themselves."

"You have saved the lives of my brother-officers," said the boy; "you
can count on me."

Savrola looked at him and an idea struck him.  "These relays were
ordered to convey Her Excellency to neutral territory; they had better
be so used.  Will you conduct her?"

"Is she in this house?" inquired the Subaltern.

"Yes," said Savrola bluntly.

Tiro laughed; he was not in the least scandalised.  "I am beginning to
learn more politics every day," he said.

"You wrong me," said Savrola; "but will you do as I ask?"

"Certainly, when shall I start?"

"When can you?"

"I will bring the travelling-coach round in half-an-hour."

"Do," said Savrola.  "I am grateful to you.  We have been through
several experiences together."

They shook hands warmly, and the Subaltern departed to get the carriage.

Savrola went up-stairs and, knocking at Lucile's door, informed her of
the plan.  She implored him to come with her.

"Indeed I wish I could," he said; "I am sick of this; but I owe it to
them to see it out.  Power has little more attraction for me.  I will
come as soon as things are settled, and we can then be married and live
happily ever afterwards."

But neither his cynical chaff nor arguments prevailed.  She threw her
arms round his neck and begged him not to desert her.  It was a sore
trial.  At last with an aching heart he tore himself away, put on his
hat and coat, and started for the Mayoralty.

The distance was about three quarters of a mile.  He had accomplished
about half of this when he met a patrol of the rebel forces under an
officer.  They called on him to halt.  He pulled his hat down over his
eyes, not wishing for the moment to be recognised.  The officer stepped
forward.  It was the wounded man to whom Savrola had entrusted the
escorting of the prisoners after the surrender of the palace.

"How far are we away from the Plaza San Marco?" he asked in a loud
voice.

"It is there," said Savrola pointing.  "Twenty-third Street is the
number."

The rebel knew him at once.  "March on," he said to his men, and the
patrol moved off.  "Sir," he added to Savrola, in the low, quick voice
of a man in moments of resolve, "I have a warrant from the Council for
your arrest.  They will deliver you to the Admiral.  Fly, while there
is time.  I will take my men by a roundabout way, which will give you
twenty minutes.  Fly; it may cost me dear, but we are comrades; you
said so."  He touched Savrola's wounded arm.  Then louder to the
patrol: "Turn down that street to the right: we had better get out of
the main thoroughfare; he may sneak off by some lane or other."  Then
again to Savrola: "There are others coming, do not delay;" and with
that he hurried after his men.  Savrola paused for a moment.  To go on
was imprisonment, perhaps death; to return, meant safety and Lucile.
Had it been the preceding day, he would have seen the matter out; but
his nerves had been strained for many hours,--and nothing stood between
them now.  He turned and hurried back to his house.

The travelling-coach stood at the door.  The Subaltern had helped
Lucile, weeping, into it.  Savrola called to him.  "I have decided to
go," he said.

"Capital!" replied Tiro.  "Leave these pigs to cut each other's
throats; they will come to their senses presently."

So they started, and as they toiled up the long ascent of the hills
behind the city, it became daylight.

"Miguel denounced you," said the Subaltern; "I heard it at the
Mayoralty.  I told you he would let you in.  You must try and get quits
with him some day."

"I never waste revenge on such creatures," replied Savrola; "they are
their own damnation."

At the top of the hill the carriage stopped, to let the panting horses
get their wind.  Savrola opened the door and stepped out.  Four miles
off, and it seemed far below him, lay the city he had left.  Great
columns of smoke rose from the conflagrations and hung, a huge black
cloud in the still clear air of the dawn.  Beneath the long rows of
white houses could be seen the ruins of the Senate, the gardens, and
the waters of the harbour.  The warships lay in the basin, their guns
trained upon the town.  The picture was a terrible one; to this pass
had the once beautiful city been reduced.

A puff of white smoke sprang from a distant ironclad, and after a while
the dull boom of a heavy gun was heard.  Savrola took out his watch; it
was six o'clock; the Admiral had kept his appointment with scrupulous
punctuality.  The forts, many of whose guns had been moved during the
night to the landward side, began to reply to the fire of the ships,
and the cannonade became general.  The smoke of other burning houses
rose slowly to join the black, overhanging cloud against which the
bursting shells showed white with yellow flashes.

"And that," said Savrola after prolonged contemplation, "is my life's
work."

A gentle hand touched his arm.  He turned and saw Lucile standing by
him.  He looked at her in all her beauty, and felt that after all he
had not lived in vain.


Those who care to further follow the annals of the Republic of Laurania
may read how, after the tumults had subsided, the hearts of the people
turned again to the illustrious exile who had won them freedom, and
whom they had deserted in the hour of victory.  They may, scoffing at
the fickleness of men, read of the return of Savrola and his beautiful
consort, to the ancient city he had loved so well.  They may learn how
Lieutenant Tiro was decorated for his valour in the war with the little
bronze Lauranian Cross which is respected all over the world; of how he
led the Lancers' polo team to England according to his desire, and
defeated the Amalgamated Millionaires in the final match for the Open
Cup; of how he served the Republic faithfully with honour and success
and rose at last to the command of the army.  Of the old nurse, indeed,
they will read no more, for history does not concern itself with such.
But they may observe that Godoy and Renos both filled offices in the
State suited to their talents, and that Savrola bore no malice to
Miguel, who continued to enjoy good-fortune as a compensation for his
mean and odious character.

But the chronicler, finding few great events, other than the opening of
colleges, railways, and canals, to recount, will remember the splendid
sentence of Gibbon, that history is "little more than the register of
the crimes, follies, and misfortunes of mankind"; and he will rejoice
that, after many troubles, peace and prosperity came back to the
Republic of Laurania.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Savrola, by Winston Spencer Churchill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAVROLA ***

***** This file should be named 50906-8.txt or 50906-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/9/0/50906/

Produced by Al Haines
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
