The Project Gutenberg EBook of Derelict, by Alan Edward Nourse

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Derelict

Author: Alan Edward Nourse

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release Date: April 13, 2010 [EBook #31976]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DERELICT ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration]


    _What was the mystery of this great ship from the dark, deep reaches
    of space? For, within its death-filled chambers--was the avenue of
    life!_


DERELICT

By Alan E. Nourse

Illustrated by Ed Emsh


John Sabo, second in command, sat bolt upright in his bunk, blinking
wide-eyed at the darkness. The alarm was screaming through the Satellite
Station, its harsh, nerve-jarring clang echoing and re-echoing down the
metal corridors, penetrating every nook and crevice and cubicle of the
lonely outpost, screaming incredibly through the dark sleeping period.
Sabo shook the sleep from his eyes, and then a panic of fear burst into
his mind. The alarm! Tumbling out of his bunk in the darkness, he
crashed into the far bulkhead, staggering giddily in the impossible
gravity as he pawed about for his magnaboots, his heart pounding
fiercely in his ears. The _alarm_! Impossible, after so long, after
these long months of bitter waiting-- In the corridor he collided with
Brownie, looking like a frightened gnome, and he growled profanity as he
raced down the corridor for the Central Control.

Frightened eyes turned to him as he blinked at the bright lights of the
room. The voices rose in a confused, anxious babble, and he shook his
head and swore, and ploughed through them toward the screen. "Kill that
damned alarm!" he roared, blinking as he counted faces. "Somebody get
the Skipper out of his sack, pronto, and stop that clatter! What's the
trouble?"

The radioman waved feebly at the view screen, shimmering on the great
side panel. "We just picked it up--"

It was a ship, moving in from beyond Saturn's rings, a huge, gray-black
blob in the silvery screen, moving in toward the Station with ponderous,
clumsy grace, growing larger by the second as it sped toward them. Sabo
felt the fear spill over in his mind, driving out all thought, and he
sank into the control chair like a well-trained automaton. His gray eyes
were wide, trained for long military years to miss nothing; his fingers
moved over the panel with deft skill. "Get the men to stations," he
growled, "and will somebody kindly get the Skipper down here, if he can
manage to take a minute."

"I'm right here." The little graying man was at his elbow, staring at
the screen with angry red eyes. "Who told you to shut off the alarm?"

"Nobody told me. Everyone was here, and it was getting on my nerves."

"What a shame." Captain Loomis' voice was icy. "I give orders on this
Station," he said smoothly, "and you'll remember it." He scowled at the
great gray ship, looming closer and closer. "What's its course?"

"Going to miss us by several thousand kilos at least. Look at that
thing! It's _traveling_."

"Contact it! This is what we've been waiting for." The captain's voice
was hoarse.

Sabo spun a dial, and cursed. "No luck. Can't get through. It's passing
us--"

"Then _grapple_ it, stupid! You want me to wipe your nose, too?"

Sabo's face darkened angrily. With slow precision he set the servo fixes
on the huge gray hulk looming up in the viewer, and then snapped the
switches sharply. Two small servos shoved their blunt noses from the
landing port of the Station, and slipped silently into space alongside.
Then, like a pair of trained dogs, they sped on their beams straight out
from the Station toward the approaching ship. The intruder was dark,
moving at tremendous velocity past the Station, as though unaware of its
existence. The servos moved out, and suddenly diverged and reversed,
twisting in long arcs to come alongside the strange ship, finally moving
in at the same velocity on either side. There was a sharp flash of
contact power; then, like a mammoth slow-motion monster, the ship jerked
in midspace and turned a graceful end-for-end arc as the servo-grapplers
gripped it like leeches and whined, glowing ruddy with the jolting power
flowing through them. Sabo watched, hardly breathing, until the great
ship spun and slowed and stopped. Then it reversed direction, and the
servos led it triumphantly back toward the landing port of the Station.

Sabo glanced at the radioman, a frown creasing his forehead. "Still
nothing?"

"Not a peep."

He stared out at the great ship, feeling a chill of wonder and fear
crawl up his spine. "So this is the mysterious puzzle of Saturn," he
muttered. "This is what we've been waiting for."

There was a curious eager light in Captain Loomis' eyes as he looked up.
"Oh, no. Not this."

"What?"

"Not this. The ships we've seen before were tiny, flat." His little eyes
turned toward the ship, and back to Sabo's heavy face. "This is
something else, something quite different." A smile curved his lips, and
he rubbed his hands together. "We go out for trout and come back with a
whale. This ship's from space, deep space. Not from Saturn. This one's
from the stars."

       *       *       *       *       *

The strange ship hung at the side of the Satellite Station, silent as a
tomb, still gently rotating as the Station slowly spun in its orbit
around Saturn.

In the captain's cabin the men shifted restlessly, uneasily facing the
eager eyes of their captain. The old man paced the floor of the cabin,
his white hair mussed, his face red with excitement. Even his carefully
calm face couldn't conceal the eagerness burning in his eyes as he faced
the crew. "Still no contact?" he asked Sparks.

The radioman shook his head anxiously. "Not a sign. I've tried every
signal I know at every wave frequency that could possibly reach them.
I've even tried a dozen frequencies that couldn't possibly reach them,
and I haven't stirred them up a bit. They just aren't answering."

Captain Loomis swung on the group of men. "All right, now, I want you to
get this straight. This is our catch. We don't know what's aboard it,
and we don't know where it came from, but it's our prize. That means not
a word goes back home about it until we've learned all there is to
learn. We're going to get the honors on this one, not some eager Admiral
back home--"

The men stirred uneasily, worried eyes seeking Sabo's face in alarm.
"What about the law?" growled Sabo. "The law says everything must be
reported within two hours."

"Then we'll break the law," the captain snapped. "I'm captain of this
Station, and those are your orders. You don't need to worry about the
law--I'll see that you're protected, but this is too big to fumble. This
ship is from the stars. That means it must have an Interstellar drive.
You know what that means. The Government will fall all over itself to
reward us--"

Sabo scowled, and the worry deepened in the men's faces. It was hard to
imagine the Government falling all over itself for anybody. They knew
too well how the Government worked. They had heard of the swift trials,
the harsh imprisonments that awaited even the petty infringers. The
Military Government had no time to waste on those who stepped out of
line, they had no mercy to spare. And the men knew that their captain
was not in favor in top Government circles. Crack patrol commanders were
not shunted into remote, lifeless Satellite Stations if their stand in
the Government was high. And deep in their minds, somehow, the men knew
they couldn't trust this little, sharp-eyed, white-haired man. The
credit for such a discovery as this might go to him, yes--but there
would be little left for them.

"The law--" Sabo repeated stubbornly.

"Damn the law! We're stationed out here in this limbo to watch Saturn
and report any activity we see coming from there. There's nothing in our
orders about anything else. There have been ships from there, they
think, but not this ship. The Government has spent billions trying to
find an Interstellar, and never gotten to first base." The captain
paused, his eyes narrowing. "We'll go aboard this ship," he said softly.
"We'll find out what's aboard it, and where it's from, and we'll take
its drive. There's been no resistance yet, but it could be dangerous. We
can't assume anything. The boarding party will report everything they
find to me. One of them will have to be a drive man. That's you,
Brownie."

The little man with the sharp black eyes looked up eagerly. "I don't
know if I could tell anything--"

"You can tell more than anyone else here. Nobody else knows space drive.
I'll count on you. If you bring back a good report, perhaps we can
cancel out certain--unfortunate items in your record. But one other
should board with you--" His eyes turned toward John Sabo.

"Not me. This is your goat." The mate's eyes were sullen. "This is gross
breach, and you know it. They'll have you in irons when we get back. I
don't want anything to do with it."

"You're under orders, Sabo. You keep forgetting."

"They're illegal orders, sir!"

"I'll take responsibility for that."

Sabo looked the old man straight in the eye. "You mean you'd sell us
down a rat hole to save your skin. That's what you mean."

Captain Loomis' eyes widened incredulously. Then his face darkened, and
he stepped very close to the big man. "You'll watch your tongue, I
think," he gritted. "Be careful what you say to me, Sabo. Be very
careful. Because if you don't, _you'll_ be in irons, and we'll see just
how long you last when you get back home. Now you've got your orders.
You'll board the ship with Brownie."

The big man's fists were clenched until the knuckles were white. "You
don't know what's over there!" he burst out. "We could be slaughtered."

The captain's smile was unpleasant. "That would be such a pity," he
murmured. "I'd really hate to see it happen--"

       *       *       *       *       *

The ship hung dark and silent, like a shadowy ghost. No flicker of light
could be seen aboard it; no sound nor faintest sign of life came from
the tall, dark hull plates. It hung there, huge and imponderable, and
swung around with the Station in its silent orbit.

The men huddled about Sabo and Brownie, helping them into their pressure
suits, checking their equipment. They had watched the little scanning
beetles crawl over the surface of the great ship, examining, probing
every nook and crevice, reporting crystals, and metals, and irons, while
the boarding party prepared. And still the radioman waited alertly for a
flicker of life from the solemn giant.

Frightened as they were of their part in the illegal secrecy, the
arrival of the ship had brought a change in the crew, lighting fires of
excitement in their eyes. They moved faster, their voices were lighter,
more cheerful. Long months on the Station had worn on their nerves--out
of contact with their homes, on a mission that was secretly jeered as
utter Governmental folly. Ships _had_ been seen, years before,
disappearing into the sullen bright atmospheric crust of Saturn, but
there had been no sign of anything since. And out there, on the lonely
guard Station, nerves had run ragged, always waiting, always watching,
wearing away even the iron discipline of their military background. They
grew bitterly weary of the same faces, the same routine, the constant
repetition of inactivity. And through the months they had watched with
increasing anxiety the conflict growing between the captain and his
bitter, sullen-eyed second-in-command, John Sabo.

And then the ship had come, incredibly, from the depths of space, and
the tensions of loneliness were forgotten in the flurry of activity. The
locks whined and opened as the two men moved out of the Station on the
little propulsion sleds, linked to the Station with light silk guy
ropes. Sabo settled himself on the sled, cursing himself for falling so
foolishly into the captain's scheme, cursing his tongue for wandering.
And deep within him he felt a new sensation, a vague uneasiness and
insecurity that he had not felt in all his years of military life. The
strange ship was a variant, an imponderable factor thrown suddenly into
his small world of hatred and bitterness, forcing him into unknown
territory, throwing his mind into a welter of doubts and fears. He
glanced uneasily across at Brownie, vaguely wishing that someone else
were with him. Brownie was a troublemaker, Brownie talked too much,
Brownie philosophized in a world that ridiculed philosophy. He'd known
men like Brownie before, and he knew that they couldn't be trusted.

The gray hull gleamed at them as they moved toward it, a monstrous wall
of polished metal. There were no dents, no surface scars from its
passage through space. They found the entrance lock without difficulty,
near the top of the ship's great hull, and Brownie probed the rim of the
lock with a dozen instruments, his dark eyes burning eagerly. And then,
with a squeal that grated in Sabo's ears, the oval port of the ship
quivered, and slowly opened.

Silently, the sleds moved into the opening. They were in a small vault,
quite dark, and the sleds settled slowly onto a metal deck. Sabo eased
himself from the seat, tuning up his audios to their highest
sensitivity, moving over to Brownie. Momentarily they touched helmets,
and Brownie's excited voice came to him, muted, but breathless. "No
trouble getting it open. It worked on the same principle as ours."

"Better get to work on the inner lock."

Brownie shot him a sharp glance. "But what about--inside? I mean, we
can't just walk in on them--"

"Why not? We've tried to contact them."

Reluctantly, the little engineer began probing the inner lock with
trembling fingers. Minutes later they were easing themselves through,
moving slowly down the dark corridor, waiting with pounding hearts for
a sound, a sign. The corridor joined another, and then still another,
until they reached a great oval door. And then they were inside, in the
heart of the ship, and their eyes widened as they stared at the thing in
the center of the great vaulted chamber.

"My God!" Brownie's voice was a hoarse whisper in the stillness. "Look
at them, Johnny!"

Sabo moved slowly across the room toward the frail, crushed form lying
against the great, gleaming panel. Thin, almost boneless arms were
pasted against the hard metal; an oval, humanoid skull was crushed like
an eggshell into the knobs and levers of the control panel. Sudden
horror shot through the big man as he looked around. At the far side of
the room was another of the things, and still another, mashed, like
lifeless jelly, into the floors and panels. Gently he peeled a bit of
jelly away from the metal, then turned with a mixture of wonder and
disgust. "All dead," he muttered.

Brownie looked up at him, his hands trembling. "No wonder there was no
sign." He looked about helplessly. "It's a derelict, Johnny. A wanderer.
How could it have happened? How long ago?"

Sabo shook his head, bewildered. "Then it was just chance that it came
to us, that we saw it--"

"No pilot, no charts. It might have wandered for centuries." Brownie
stared about the room, a frightened look on his face. And then he was
leaning over the control panel, probing at the array of levers, his
fingers working eagerly at the wiring. Sabo nodded approvingly. "We'll
have to go over it with a comb," he said. "I'll see what I can find in
the rest of the ship. You go ahead on the controls and drive." Without
waiting for an answer he moved swiftly from the round chamber, out into
the corridor again, his stomach almost sick.

It took them many hours. They moved silently, as if even a slight sound
might disturb the sleeping alien forms, smashed against the dark metal
panels. In another room were the charts, great, beautiful charts,
totally unfamiliar, studded with star formations he had never seen,
noted with curious, meaningless symbols. As Sabo worked he heard Brownie
moving down into the depths of the ship, toward the giant engine rooms.
And then, some silent alarm clicked into place in Sabo's mind,
tightening his stomach, screaming to be heard. Heart pounding, he dashed
down the corridor like a cat, seeing again in his mind the bright, eager
eyes of the engineer. Suddenly the meaning of that eagerness dawned on
him. He scampered down a ladder, along a corridor, and down another
ladder, down to the engine room, almost colliding with Brownie as he
crossed from one of the engines to a battery of generators on the far
side of the room.

"Brownie!"

"What's the trouble?"

Sabo trembled, then turned away. "Nothing," he muttered. "Just a
thought." But he watched as the little man snaked into the labyrinth of
dynamos and coils and wires, peering eagerly, probing, searching, making
notes in the little pad in his hand.

[Illustration]

Finally, hours later, they moved again toward the lock where they had
left their sleds. Not a word passed between them. The uneasiness was
strong in Sabo's mind now, growing deeper, mingling with fear and a
premonition of impending evil. A dead ship, a derelict, come to them by
merest chance from some unthinkably remote star. He cursed, without
knowing why, and suddenly he felt he hated Brownie as much as he hated
the captain waiting for them in the Station.

But as he stepped into the Station's lock, a new thought crossed his
mind, almost dazzling him with its unexpectedness. He looked at the
engineer's thin face, and his hands were trembling as he opened the
pressure suit.

       *       *       *       *       *

He deliberately took longer than was necessary to give his report to the
captain, dwelling on unimportant details, watching with malicious
amusement the captain's growing annoyance. Captain Loomis' eyes kept
sliding to Brownie, as though trying to read the information he wanted
from the engineer's face. Sabo rolled up the charts slowly, stowing them
in a pile on the desk. "That's the picture, sir. Perhaps a qualified
astronomer could make something of it; I haven't the knowledge or the
instruments. The ship came from outside the system, beyond doubt.
Probably from a planet with lighter gravity than our own, judging from
the frailty of the creatures. Oxygen breathers, from the looks of their
gas storage. If you ask me, I'd say--"

"All right, all right," the captain breathed impatiently. "You can write
it up and hand it to me. It isn't really important where they came from,
or whether they breathe oxygen or fluorine." He turned his eyes to the
engineer, and lit a cigar with trembling fingers. "The important thing
is _how_ they got here. The drive, Brownie. You went over the engines
carefully? What did you find?"

Brownie twitched uneasily, and looked at the floor. "Oh, yes, I examined
them carefully. Wasn't too hard. I examined every piece of drive
machinery on the ship, from stem to stern."

Sabo nodded, slowly, watching the little man with a carefully blank
face. "That's right. You gave it a good going over."

Brownie licked his lips. "It's a derelict, like Johnny told you. They
were dead. All of them. Probably had been dead for a long time. I
couldn't tell, of course. Probably nobody could tell. But they must have
been dead for centuries--"

The captain's eyes blinked as the implication sank in. "Wait a minute,"
he said. "What do you mean, _centuries_?"

Brownie stared at his shoes. "The atomic piles were almost dead," he
muttered in an apologetic whine. "The ship wasn't going any place,
captain. It was just wandering. Maybe it's wandered for thousands of
years." He took a deep breath, and his eyes met the captain's for a
brief agonized moment. "They don't have Interstellar, sir. Just plain,
simple, slow atomics. Nothing different. They've been traveling for
centuries, and it would have taken them just as long to get back."

The captain's voice was thin, choked. "Are you trying to tell me that
their drive is no different from our own? That a ship has actually
wandered into Interstellar space _without a space drive_?"

Brownie spread his hands helplessly. "Something must have gone wrong.
They must have started off for another planet in their own system, and
something went wrong. They broke into space, and they all died. And the
ship just went on moving. They never intended an Interstellar hop. They
couldn't have. They didn't have the drive for it."

The captain sat back numbly, his face pasty gray. The light had faded in
his eyes now; he sat as though he'd been struck. "You--you couldn't be
wrong? You couldn't have missed anything?"

Brownie's eyes shifted unhappily, and his voice was very faint. "No,
sir."

The captain stared at them for a long moment, like a stricken child.
Slowly he picked up one of the charts, his mouth working. Then, with a
bitter roar, he threw it in Sabo's face. "Get out of here! Take this
garbage and get out! And get the men to their stations. We're here to
watch Saturn, and by god, we'll watch Saturn!" He turned away, a hand
over his eyes, and they heard his choking breath as they left the
cabin.

Slowly, Brownie walked out into the corridor, started down toward his
cabin, with Sabo silent at his heels. He looked up once at the mate's
heavy face, a look of pleading in his dark brown eyes, and then opened
the door to his quarters. Like a cat, Sabo was in the room before him,
dragging him in, slamming the door. He caught the little man by the neck
with one savage hand, and shoved him unceremoniously against the door,
his voice a vicious whisper. "_All right, talk! Let's have it now!_"

Brownie choked, his eyes bulging, his face turning gray in the dim light
of the cabin. "Johnny! Let me down! What's the matter? You're choking
me, Johnny--"

The mate's eyes were red, with heavy lines of disgust and bitterness
running from his eyes and the corners of his mouth. "You stinking little
liar! _Talk_, damn it! You're not messing with the captain now, you're
messing with _me_, and I'll have the truth if I have to cave in your
skull--"

"I told you the truth! I don't know what you mean--"

Sabo's palm smashed into his face, jerking his head about like an apple
on a string. "That's the wrong answer," he grated. "I warn you, don't
lie! The captain is an ambitious ass, he couldn't think his way through
a multiplication table. He's a little child. But I'm not quite so dull."
He threw the little man down in a heap, his eyes blazing. "You silly
fool, your story is so full of holes you could drive a tank through it.
They just up and died, did they? I'm supposed to believe that? Smashed
up against the panels the way they were? Only one thing could crush them
like that. Any fool could see it. Acceleration. And I don't mean atomic
acceleration. Something else." He glared down at the man quivering on
the floor. "They had Interstellar drive, didn't they, Brownie?"

Brownie nodded his head, weakly, almost sobbing, trying to pull himself
erect. "Don't tell the captain," he sobbed. "Oh, Johnny, for god's sake,
listen to me, don't let him know I lied. I was going to tell you anyway,
Johnny, really I was. I've got a plan, a good plan, can't you see it?"
The gleam of excitement came back into the sharp little eyes. "They had
it, all right. Their trip probably took just a few months. They had a
drive I've never seen before, non-atomic. I couldn't tell the principle,
with the look I had, but I think I could work it." He sat up, his whole
body trembling. "Don't give me away, Johnny, listen a minute--"

Sabo sat back against the bunk, staring at the little man. "You're out
of your mind," he said softly. "You don't know what you're doing. What
are you going to do when His Nibs goes over for a look himself? He's
stupid, but not that stupid."

Brownie's voice choked, his words tumbling over each other in his
eagerness. "He won't get a chance to see it, Johnny. He's got to take
our word until he sees it, and we can stall him--"

Sabo blinked. "A day or so--maybe. But what then? Oh, how could you be
so stupid? He's on the skids, he's out of favor and fighting for his
life. That drive is the break that could put him on top. Can't you see
he's selfish? He has to be, in this world, to get anything. Anything or
anyone who blocks him, he'll destroy, if he can. Can't you see that?
When he spots this, your life won't be worth spitting at."

Brownie was trembling as he sat down opposite the big man. His voice was
harsh in the little cubicle, heavy with pain and hopelessness. "That's
right," he said. "My life isn't worth a nickle. Neither is yours.
Neither is anybody's, here or back home. Nobody's life is worth a
nickle. Something's happened to us in the past hundred years,
Johnny--something horrible. I've seen it creeping and growing up around
us all my life. People don't matter any more, it's the Government, what
the Government thinks that matters. It's a web, a cancer that grows in
its own pattern, until it goes so far it can't be stopped. Men like
Loomis could see the pattern, and adapt to it, throw away all the
worthwhile things, the love and beauty and peace that we once had in our
lives. Those men can get somewhere, they can turn this life into a
climbing game, waiting their chance to get a little farther toward the
top, a little closer to some semblance of security--"

"Everybody adapts to it," Sabo snapped. "They have to. You don't see me
moving for anyone else, do you? I'm for _me_, and believe me I know it.
I don't give a hang for you, or Loomis, or anyone else alive--just me. I
want to stay alive, that's all. You're a dreamer, Brownie. But until you
pull something like this, you can learn to stop dreaming if you want
to--"

"No, no, you're wrong--oh, you're horribly wrong, Johnny. Some of us
_can't_ adapt, we haven't got what it takes, or else we have something
else in us that won't let us go along. And right there we're beat before
we start. There's no place for us now, and there never will be." He
looked up at the mate's impassive face. "We're in a life where we don't
belong, impounded into a senseless, never-ending series of fights and
skirmishes and long, lonely waits, feeding this insane urge of the
Government to expand, out to the planets, to the stars, farther and
farther, bigger and bigger. We've got to go, seeking newer and greater
worlds to conquer, with nothing to conquer them with, and nothing to
conquer them for. There's life somewhere else in our solar system, so it
must be sought out and conquered, no matter what or where it is. We live
in a world of iron and fear, and there was no place for me, and others
like me, _until this ship came_--"

Sabo looked at him strangely. "So I was right. I read it on your face
when we were searching the ship. I knew what you were thinking...." His
face darkened angrily. "You couldn't get away with it, Brownie. Where
could you go, what could you expect to find? You're talking death,
Brownie. Nothing else--"

"No, no. Listen, Johnny." Brownie leaned closer, his eyes bright and
intent on the man's heavy face. "The captain has to take our word for
it, until he sees the ship. Even then he couldn't tell for sure--I'm
the only drive engineer on the Station. We have the charts, we could
work with them, try to find out where the ship came from; I already have
an idea of how the drive is operated. Another look and I could make it
work. Think of it, Johnny! What difference does it make where we went,
or what we found? You're a misfit, too, you know that--this coarseness
and bitterness is a shell, if you could only see it, a sham. You don't
really believe in this world we're in--who cares where, if only we could
go, get away? Oh, it's a chance, the wildest, freak chance, but we could
take it--"

"If only to get away from _him_," said Sabo in a muted voice. "Lord, how
I hate him. I've seen smallness and ambition before--pettiness and
treachery, plenty of it. But that man is our whole world knotted up in
one little ball. I don't think I'd get home without killing him, just to
stop that voice from talking, just to see fear cross his face one time.
But if we took the ship, it would break him for good." A new light
appeared in the big man's eyes. "He'd be through, Brownie. Washed up."

"And we'd be _free_--"

Sabo's eyes were sharp. "What about the acceleration? It killed those
that came in the ship."

"But they were so frail, so weak. Light brittle bones and soft jelly.
Our bodies are stronger, we could stand it."

Sabo sat for a long time, staring at Brownie. His mind was suddenly
confused by the scope of the idea, racing in myriad twirling fantasies,
parading before his eyes the long, bitter, frustrating years, the
hopelessness of his own life, the dull aching feeling he felt deep in
his stomach and bones each time he set back down on Earth, to join the
teeming throngs of hungry people. He thought of the rows of drab
apartments, the thin faces, the hollow, hunted eyes of the people he had
seen. He knew that that was why he was a soldier--because soldiers ate
well, they had time to sleep, they were never allowed long hours to
think, and wonder, and grow dull and empty. But he knew his life had
been barren. The life of a mindless automaton, moving from place to
place, never thinking, never daring to think or speak, hoping only to
work without pain each day, and sleep without nightmares.

And then, he thought of the nights in his childhood, when he had lain
awake, sweating with fear, as the airships screamed across the dark sky
above, bound he never knew where; and then, hearing in the far distance
the booming explosion, he had played that horrible little game with
himself, seeing how high he could count before he heard the weary,
plodding footsteps of the people on the road, moving on to another
place. He had known, even as a little boy, that the only safe place was
in those bombers, that the place for survival was in the striking
armies, and his life had followed the hard-learned pattern, twisting him
into the cynical mold of the mercenary soldier, dulling the quick and
clever mind, drilling into him the ways and responses of order and obey,
stripping him of his heritage of love and humanity. Others less
thoughtful had been happier; they had succeeded in forgetting the life
they had known before, they had been able to learn easily and well the
lessons of the repudiation of the rights of men which had crept like a
blight through the world. But Sabo, too, was a misfit, wrenched into a
mold he could not fit. He had sensed it vaguely, never really knowing
when or how he had built the shell of toughness and cynicism, but also
sensing vaguely that it was built, and that in it he could hide,
somehow, and laugh at himself, and his leaders, and the whole world
through which he plodded. He had laughed, but there had been long
nights, in the narrow darkness of spaceship bunks, when his mind pounded
at the shell, screaming out in nightmare, and he had wondered if he had
really lost his mind.

His gray eyes narrowed as he looked at Brownie, and he felt his heart
pounding in his chest, pounding with a fury that he could no longer
deny. "It would have to be fast," he said softly. "Like lightning,
tonight, tomorrow--very soon."

"Oh, yes, I know that. But we _can_ do it--"

"Yes," said Sabo, with a hard, bitter glint in his eyes. "Maybe we can."

       *       *       *       *       *

The preparation was tense. For the first time in his life, Sabo knew the
meaning of real fear, felt the clinging aura of sudden death in every
glance, every word of the men around him. It seemed incredible that the
captain didn't notice the brief exchanges with the little engineer, or
his own sudden appearances and disappearances about the Station. But the
captain sat in his cabin with angry eyes, snapping answers without even
looking up. Still, Sabo knew that the seeds of suspicion lay planted in
his mind, ready to burst forth with awful violence at any slight
provocation. As he worked, the escape assumed greater and greater
proportions in Sabo's mind; he knew with increasing urgency and daring
that nothing must stop him. The ship was there, the only bridge away
from a life he could no longer endure, and his determination blinded him
to caution.

Primarily, he pondered over the charts, while Brownie, growing hourly
more nervous, poured his heart into a study of his notes and sketches. A
second look at the engines was essential; the excuse he concocted for
returning to the ship was recklessly slender, and Sabo spent a grueling
five minutes dissuading the captain from accompanying him. But the
captain's eyes were dull, and he walked his cabin, sunk in a gloomy,
remorseful trance.

The hours passed, and the men saw, in despair, that more precious,
dangerous hours would be necessary before the flight could be attempted.
And then, abruptly, Sabo got the call to the captain's cabin. He found
the old man at his desk, regarding him with cold eyes, and his heart
sank. The captain motioned him to a seat, and then sat back, lighting a
cigar with painful slowness. "I want you to tell me," he said in a
lifeless voice, "exactly what Brownie thinks he's doing."

Sabo went cold. Carefully he kept his eyes on the captain's face. "I
guess he's nervous," he said. "He doesn't belong on a Satellite Station.
He belongs at home. The place gets on his nerves."

"I didn't like his report."

"I know," said Sabo.

The captain's eyes narrowed. "It was hard to believe. Ships don't just
happen out of space. They don't wander out interstellar by accident,
either." An unpleasant smile curled his lips. "I'm not telling you
anything new. I wouldn't want to accuse Brownie of lying, of course--or
you either. But we'll know soon. A patrol craft will be here from the
Triton supply base in an hour. I signaled as soon as I had your
reports." The smile broadened maliciously. "The patrol craft will have
experts aboard. Space drive experts. They'll review your report."

"An hour--"

The captain smiled. "That's what I said. In that hour, you could tell me
the truth. I'm not a drive man, I'm an administrator, and organizer and
director. You're the technicians. The truth now could save you much
unhappiness--in the future."

Sabo stood up heavily. "You've got your information," he said with a
bitter laugh. "The patrol craft will confirm it."

The captain's face went a shade grayer. "All right," he said. "Go ahead,
laugh. I told you, anyway."

Sabo didn't realize how his hands were trembling until he reached the
end of the corridor. In despair he saw the plan crumbling beneath his
feet, and with the despair came the cold undercurrent of fear. The
patrol would discover them, disclose the hoax. There was no choice
left--ready or not, they'd _have_ to leave.

Quickly he turned in to the central control room where Brownie was
working. He sat down, repeating the captain's news in a soft voice.

"An _hour_! But how can we--"

"We've _got_ to. We can't quit now, we're dead if we do."

Brownie's eyes were wide with fear. "But can't we stall them, somehow?
Maybe if we turned on the captain--"

"The crew would back him. They wouldn't dare go along with us. We've got
to run, nothing else." He took a deep breath. "Can you control the
drive?"

Brownie stared at his hands. "I--I think so. I can only try."

"You've got to. It's now or never. Get down to the lock, and I'll get
the charts. Get the sleds ready."

He scooped the charts from his bunk, folded them carefully and bound
them swiftly with cord. Then he ran silently down the corridor to the
landing port lock. Brownie was already there, in the darkness, closing
the last clamps on his pressure suit. Sabo handed him the charts, and
began the laborious task of climbing into his own suit, panting in the
darkness.

And then the alarm was clanging in his ear, and the lock was flooded
with brilliant light. Sabo stopped short, a cry on his lips, staring at
the entrance to the control room.

The captain was grinning, a nasty, evil grin, his eyes hard and
humorless as he stood there flanked by three crewmen. His hand gripped
an ugly power gun tightly. He just stood there, grinning, and his voice
was like fire in Sabo's ears. "Too bad," he said softly. "You almost
made it, too. Trouble is, two can't keep a secret. Shame, Johnny, a
smart fellow like you. I might have expected as much from Brownie, but I
thought you had more sense--"

Something snapped in Sabo's mind, then. With a roar, he lunged at the
captain's feet, screaming his bitterness and rage and frustration,
catching the old man's calves with his powerful shoulders. The captain
toppled, and Sabo was fighting for the power gun, straining with all his
might to twist the gun from the thin hand, and he heard his voice
shouting, "Run! _Go, Brownie, make it go!_"

The lock was open, and he saw Brownie's sled nose out into the
blackness. The captain choked, his face purple. "Get him! Don't let him
get away!"

The lock clanged, and the screens showed the tiny fragile sled jet out
from the side of the Station, the small huddled figure clinging to it,
heading straight for the open port of the gray ship. "Stop him! The
guns, you fools, the guns!"

The alarm still clanged, and the control room was a flurry of activity.
Three men snapped down behind the tracer-guns, firing without aiming, in
a frenzied attempt to catch the fleeing sled. The sled began
zig-zagging, twisting wildly as the shells popped on either side of it.
The captain twisted away from Sabo's grip with a roar, and threw one of
the crewmen to the deck, wrenching the gun controls from his hands. "Get
the big ones on the ship! Blast it! If it gets away you'll all pay."

Suddenly the sled popped into the ship's port, and the hatch slowly
closed behind it. Raving, the captain turned the gun on the sleek,
polished hull plates, pressed the firing levels on the war-head servos.
Three of them shot out from the Satellite, like deadly bugs, careening
through the intervening space, until one of them struck the side of the
gray ship, and exploded in purple fury against the impervious hull. And
the others nosed into the flame, and passed on through, striking
nothing.

Like the blinking of a light, the alien ship had throbbed, and jerked,
and was gone.

With a roar the captain brought his fist down on the hard plastic and
metal of the control panel, kicked at the sheet of knobs and levers with
a heavy foot, his face purple with rage. His whole body shook as he
turned on Sabo, his eyes wild. "You let him get away! It was your fault,
yours! But _you_ won't get away! I've got you, and you'll pay, do you
hear that?" He pulled himself up until his face was bare inches from
Sabo's, his teeth bared in a frenzy of hatred. "Now we'll see who'll
laugh, my friend. You'll laugh in the death chamber, if you can still
laugh by then!" He turned to the men around him. "Take him," he snarled.
"Lock him in his quarters, and guard him well. And while you're doing
it, take a good look at him. See how he laughs now."

They marched him down to his cabin, stunned, still wondering what had
happened. Something had gone in his mind in that second, something that
told him that the choice had to be made, instantly. Because he knew,
with dull wonder, that in that instant when the lights went on he could
have stopped Brownie, could have saved himself. He could have taken for
himself a piece of the glory and promotion due to the discoverers of an
Interstellar drive. But he had also known, somehow, in that short
instant, that the only hope in the world lay in that one nervous,
frightened man, and the ship which could take him away.

And the ship was gone. That meant the captain was through. He'd had his
chance, the ship's coming had given him his chance, and he had muffed
it. Now he, too, would pay. The Government would not be pleased that
such a ship had leaked through his fingers. Captain Loomis was through.

And him? Somehow, it didn't seem to matter any more. He had made a stab
at it, he had tried. He just hadn't had the luck. But he knew there was
more to that. Something in his mind was singing, some deep feeling of
happiness and hope had crept into his mind, and he couldn't worry about
himself any more. There was nothing more for him; they had him cold. But
deep in his mind he felt a curious satisfaction, transcending any fear
and bitterness. Deep in his heart, he knew that _one_ man had escaped.

And then he sat back and laughed.


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If: Worlds of Science Fiction_ May
    1953. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Derelict, by Alan Edward Nourse

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DERELICT ***

***** This file should be named 31976.txt or 31976.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/1/9/7/31976/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
