Project Gutenberg's The Mule-Bone:, by Zora Hurston and Langston Hughes

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mule-Bone:
       A Comedy of Negro Life in Three Acts

Author: Zora Hurston and Langston Hughes

Release Date: October 2, 2006 [EBook #19435]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MULE-BONE: ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Library of Congress)







[Transcriber's Note: A few obvious typo's in stage directions have
been fixed, though nothing in the dialogue has been changed.]



THE MULE-BONE


A COMEDY OF NEGRO LIFE IN

THREE ACTS

BY

LANGSTON HUGHES and ZORA HURSTON




CHARACTERS


JIM WESTON:           Guitarist, Methodist, slightly arrogant, agressive,
                      somewhat self-important, ready with his tongue.

DAVE CARTER:          Dancer, Baptist, soft, happy-go-lucky character,
                      slightly dumb and unable to talk rapidly and
                      wittily.

DAISY TAYLOR:         Methodist, domestic servant, plump, dark and sexy,
                      self-conscious of clothes and appeal, fickle.

JOE CLARK:            The Mayor, storekeeper and postmaster, arrogant,
                      ignorant and powerful in a self-assertive way,
                      large, fat man, Methodist.

ELDER SIMMS:          Methodist minister, newcomer in town, ambitious,
                      small and fly, but not very intelligent.

ELDER CHILDERS:       Big, loose-jointed, slow spoken but not dumb. Long
                      resident in the town, calm and sure of himself.

KATIE CARTER:         Dave's aunt, little old wizened dried-up lady.

MRS. HATTIE CLARK:    The Mayor's wife, fat and flabby mulatto
                      high-pitched voice.

THE MRS. REV. SIMMS:  Large and agressive.

THE MRS. REV.         Just a wife who thinks of details.
CHILDERS:

LUM BOGER:            Young town marshall about twenty, tall, gangly,
                      with big flat feet, liked to show off in public.

TEET MILLER:          Village vamp who is jealous of DAISY.

LIGE MOSELY:          A village wag.

WALTER THOMAS:        Another village wag.

ADA LEWIS:            A promiscuous lover.

DELLA LEWIS:          Baptist, poor housekeeper, mother of ADA.

BOOTSIE PITTS:        A local vamp.

MRS. DILCIE ANDERSON: Village housewife, Methodist.

WILLIE NIXON:         Methodist, short runt.




ACT I


SETTING: The raised porch of JOE CLARK'S Store and the street in
front. Porch stretches almost completely across the stage, with a
plank bench at either end. At the center of the porch three steps
leading from street. Rear of porch, center, door to the store. On
either side are single windows on which signs, at left, "POST OFFICE",
and at right, "GENERAL STORE" are painted. Soap boxes, axe handles,
small kegs, etc., on porch on which townspeople sit and lounge during
action. Above the roof of the porch the "false front", or imitation
second story of the shop is seen with large sign painted across it
"JOE CLARK'S GENERAL STORE". Large kerosine street lamp on post at
right in front of porch.

Saturday afternoon and the villagers are gathered around the store.
Several men sitting on boxes at edge of porch chewing sugar cane,
spitting tobacco juice, arguing, some whittling, others eating
peanuts. During the act the women all dressed up in starched dresses
parade in and out of store. People buying groceries, kids playing in
the street, etc. General noise of conversation, laughter and children
shouting. But when the curtain rises there is momentary lull for
cane-chewing. At left of porch four men are playing cards on a soap
box, and seated on the edge of the porch at extreme right two children
are engaged in a checker game, with the board on the floor between
them.

When the curtain goes up the following characters are discovered on
the porch: MAYOR JOE CLARK, the storekeeper; DEACON HAMBO; DEACON
GOODWIN; Old Man MATT BRAZZLE; WILL CODY; SYKES JONES; LUM BOGER, the
young town marshall; LIGE MOSELY and WALTER THOMAS, two village wags;
TOM NIXON and SAM MOSELY, and several others, seated on boxes, kegs,
benches and floor of the porch. TONY TAYLOR is sitting on steps of
porch with empty basket. MRS. TAYLOR comes out with her arms full of
groceries, empties them into basket and goes back in store. All the
men are chewing sugar cane earnestly with varying facial expressions.
The noise of the breaking and sucking of cane can be clearly heard in
the silence. Occasionally the laughter and shouting of children is
heard nearby off stage.

HAMBO: (To BRAZZLE) Say, Matt, gimme a jint or two of dat green
cane--dis ribbon cane is hard.

LIGE: Yeah, and you ain't got de chears in yo' parlor you useter have.

HAMBO: Dat's all right, Lige, but I betcha right now wid dese few
teeth I got I kin eat up more cane'n you kin grow.

LIGE: I know you kin and that's de reason I ain't going to tempt you.
But youse gettin' old in lots of ways--look at dat bald-head--just as
clean as my hand. (Exposes his palm).

HAMBO: Don't keer if it tis--I don't want nothin'--not even
hair--between me and God. (General laughter--LIGE joins in as well.
Cane chewing keeps up. Silence for a moment.)

(Off stage a high shrill voice can be heard calling:)

VOICE: Sister Mosely, Oh, Sister Mosely! (A pause) Miz Mosely! (Very
irritated) Oh, Sister Mattie! You hear me out here--you just won't
answer!

VOICE OF MRS. MOSELY: Whoo-ee ... somebody calling me?

VOICE OF MRS. ROBERTS: (Angrily) Never mind now--you couldn't come
when I called you. I don't want yo' lil ole weasley turnip greens.
(Silence)

MATT BRAZZLE: Sister Roberts is en town agin! If she was mine, I'll
be hen-fired if I wouldn't break her down in de lines (loins)--good as
dat man is to her!

HAMBO: I wish she was mine jes' one day--de first time she open her
mouf to beg _anybody_, I'd lam her wid lightning.

JOE CLARK: I God, Jake Roberts buys mo' rations out dis store than any
man in dis town. I don't see to my Maker whut she do wid it all....
Here she come....

(ENTER MRS. JAKE ROBERTS, a heavy light brown woman with a basket on
her arm. A boy about ten walks beside her carrying a small child about
a year old straddle of his back. Her skirts are sweeping the ground.
She walks up to the step, puts one foot upon the steps and looks
forlornly at all the men, then fixes her look on JOE CLARK.)

MRS. ROBERTS: Evenin', Brother Mayor.

CLARK: Howdy do, Mrs. Roberts. How's yo' husband?

MRS. ROBERTS: (Beginning her professional whine): He ain't much and I
ain't much and my chillun is poly. We ain't got 'nough to eat! Lawd,
Mr. Clark, gimme a lil piece of side meat to cook us a pot of greens.

CLARK: Aw gwan, Sister Roberts. You got plenty bacon home. Last week
Jake bought....

MRS. ROBERTS: (Frantically) Lawd, Mist' Clark, how long you think dat
lil piece of meat last me an' my chillun? Lawd, me and my chillun is
_hongry_! God knows, Jake don't fee-eed me!

(MR. CLARK sits unmoved. MRS. ROBERTS advances upon him)

Mist' Clark!

CLARK: I God, woman, don't keep on after me! Every time I look, youse
round here beggin' for everything you see.

LIGE: And whut she don't see she whoops for it just de same.

MRS. ROBERTS: (In dramatic begging pose) Mist' Clark! Ain't you boin'
do nuthin' for me? And you see me and my poor chillun is starvin'....

CLARK: (Exasperated rises) I God, woman, a man can't git no peace wid
somebody like you in town. (He goes angrily into the store followed by
MRS. ROBERTS. The boy sits down on the edge of the porch sucking the
baby's thumb.)

VOICE OF MRS. ROBERTS: A piece 'bout dis wide....

VOICE OF CLARK: I God, naw! Yo' husband done bought you plenty meat,
nohow.

VOICE OF MRS. ROBERTS: (In great anguish) Ow! Mist' Clark! Don't you
cut dat lil tee-ninchy piece of meat for me and my chillun! (Sound of
running feet inside the store.) I ain't a going to tetch it!

VOICE OF CLARK: Well, don't touch it then. That's all you'll git outa
me.

VOICE OF MRS. ROBERTS: (Calmer) Well, hand it chear den. Lawd, me and
my chillun is _so_ hongry.... Jake don't fee-eed me. (She re-enters by
door of store with the slab of meat in her hand and an outraged look
on her face. She gazes all about her for sympathy.) Lawd, me and my
poor chillun is _so_ hongry ... and some folks has _every_thing and
they's so _stingy_ and gripin'.... Lawd knows, Jake don't fee-eed me!
(She exits right on this line followed by the boy with the baby on his
back.)

(All the men gaze behind her, then at each other and shake their
heads.)

HAMBO: Poor Jak.... I'm really sorry for dat man. If she was mine I'd
beat her till her ears hung down like a Georgy mule.

WALTER THOMAS: I'd beat her till she smell like onions.

LIGE: I'd romp on her till she slack like lime.

NIXON: I'd stomp her till she rope like okra.

VOICE OF MRS. ROBERTS: (Off stage right) Lawd, Miz Lewis, you goin'
give me dat lil han'ful of greens for me and my chillun. Why dat ain't
a eye-full. I ought not to take 'em ... but me and my chillun is _so_
hongry.... Some folks is so stingy and gripin'! Lawd knows, Tony don't
_feed_ me!

(The noise of cane-chewing is heard again. Enter JOE LINDSAY left with
a gun over his shoulder and the large leg bone of a mule in the other
hand. He approaches the step wearily.)

HAMBO: Well, did you git any partridges, Joe?

JOE: (Resting his gun and seating himself) Nope, but I made de
feathers fly.

HAMBO: I don't see no birds.

JOE: Oh, the feathers flew off on de birds.

LIGE: I don't see nothin' but dat bone. Look lak you done kilt a cow
and et 'im raw out in de woods.

JOE: Don't y'all know dat hock-bone?

WALTER: How you reckon we gointer know every hock-bone in Orange
County sight unseen?

JOE: (Standing the bone up on the floor of the porch) Dis is a
hock-bone of Brazzle's ole yaller mule.

(General pleased interest. Everybody wants to touch it.)

BRAZZLE: (Coming forward) Well, sir! (Takes bone in both hands and
looks up and down the length of it) If 'tain't my ole mule! This sho
was one hell of a mule, too. He'd fight every inch in front of de
plow ... he'd turn over de mowing machine ... run away wid de
wagon ... and you better not look like you wanter _ride_ 'im!

LINDSAY: (Laughing) Yeah, I 'member seein' you comin' down de road
just so ... (He limps wid one hand on his buttocks) one day.

BRAZZLE: Dis mule was so evil he used to try to bite and kick when I'd
go in de stable to feed 'im.

WALTER: He was too mean to git fat. He was so skinny you could do a
week's washing on his ribs for a washboard and hang 'em up on his
hip-bones to dry.

LIGE: I 'member one day, Brazzle, you sent yo' boy to Winter Park
after some groceries wid a basket. So here he went down de road ridin'
dis mule wid dis basket on his arm.... Whut you reckon dat ole
contrary mule done when he got to dat crooked place in de road going
round Park Lake? He turnt right round and went through de handle of
dat basket ... wid de boy still up on his back. (General laughter)

BRAZZLE: Yeah, he up and died one Sat'day just for spite ... but he
was too contrary to lay down on his side like a mule orter and die
decent. Naw, he made out to lay down on his narrer contracted back and
die wid his feets sticking straight up in de air just so. (He gets
down on his back and illustrates.) We drug him out to de swamp wid 'im
dat way, didn't we, Hambo?

JOE CLARK: I God, Brazzle, we all seen it. Didn't we all go to de
draggin' out? More folks went to yo' mule's draggin' out than went to
last school closing.... Bet there ain't been a thing right in
mule-hell for four years.

HAMBO: Been dat long since he been dead?

CLARK: I God, yes. He died de week after I started to cutting' dat new
ground.

(The bone is passing from hand to hand. At last a boy about twelve
takes it. He has just walked up and is proudly handling the bone when
a woman's voice is heard off stage right.)

VOICE: Senator! Senator!! Oh, you Senator?

BOY: (Turning displeased mutters) Aw, shux. (Loudly) Ma'm?

VOICE: If you don't come here you better!

SENATOR: Yes ma'am. (He drops bone on ground down stage and trots off
frowning.) Soon as we men git to doing something dese wimmen....
(Exits, right.)

(Enter TEET and BOOTSIE left, clean and primped in voile dresses just
alike. They speak diffidently and enter store. The men admire them
casually.)

LIGE: Them girls done turned out to be right good-looking.

WALTER: Teet ain't as pretty now as she was a few years back. She used
to be fat as a butter ball wid legs just like two whiskey-kegs. She's
too skinny since she got her growth.

CODY: Ain't none of 'em pretty as dat Miss Daisy. God! She's pretty as
a speckled pup.

LIGE: But she was sho nuff ugly when she was little ... little ole
hard black knot. She sho has changed since she been away up North. If
she ain't pretty now, there ain't a hound dog in Georgy.

(Re-enter SENATOR BAILEY and stops on the steps. He addresses JOE
CLARK.)

SENATOR: Mist' Clark....

HAMBO: (To Senator) Ain't you got no manners? We all didn't sleep wid
you last night.

SENATOR: (Embarrassed) Good evening, everybody.

ALL THE MEN: Good evening, son, boy, Senator, etc.

SENATOR: Mist' Clark, mama said is Daisy been here dis evenin'?

JOE CLARK: Ain't laid my eyes on her. Ain't she working over in
Maitland?

SENATOR: Yessuh ... but she's off today and mama sent her down here to
get de groceries.

JOE CLARK: Well, tell yo' ma I ain't seen her.

SENATOR: Well, she say to tell you when she come, to tell her ma say
she better git home and dat quick.

JOE CLARK: I will. (Exit BOY right.)

LIGE: Bet she's off somewhere wid Dave or Jim.

WALTER: I don't bet it ... I know it. She's got them two in de
go-long.

(Re-enter TEET and BOOTSIE from store. TEET has a letter and BOOTSIE
two or three small parcels. The men look up with interest as they come
out on the porch.)

WALTER: (Winking) Whut's dat you got, Teet ... letter from Dave?

TEET: (Flouncing) Naw indeed! It's a letter from my B-I-T-sweetie!
(Rolls her eyes and hips.)

WALTER: (Winking) Well, ain't Dave yo' B-I-T-sweetie? I thought y'all
was 'bout to git married. Everywhere I looked dis summer 'twas you and
Dave, Bootsie and Jim. I thought all of y'all would've done jumped
over de broomstick by now.

TEET: (Flourishing letter) Don't tell it to me ... tell it to the
ever-loving Mr. Albert Johnson way over in Apopka.

BOOTSIE: (Rolling her eyes) Oh, tell 'em 'bout the ever-loving Mr.
Jimmy Cox from Altamont. Oh, I can't stand to see my baby lose.

HAMBO: It's lucky y'all girls done got some more fellers, cause look
like Daisy done treed both Jim and Dave at once, or they done treed
here one.

TEET: Let her have 'em ... nobody don't keer. They don't handle de "In
God we trust" lak my Johnson. He's head bellman at de hotel.

BOOTSIE: Mr. Cox got money's grandma and old grandpa change. (The
girls exit huffily.)

LINDSAY: (To HAMBO, pseudo-seriously) You oughtn't tease dem gals lak
dat.

HAMBO: Oh, I laks to see gals all mad. But dem boys is crazy sho nuff.
Before Daisy come back here they both had a good-looking gal a piece.
Now they 'bout to fall out and fight over half a gal a piece. Neither
one won't give over and let de other one have her.

LIGE: And she ain't thinking too much 'bout no one man. (Looks off
left.) Here she come now. God! She got a mean walk on her!

WALTER: Yeah, man. She handles a lot of traffic! Oh, mama, throw it in
de river ... papa'll come git it!

LINDSAY: Aw, shut up, you married men!

LIGE: Man don't go blind cause he gits married, do he? (Enter DAISY
hurriedly. Stops at step a moment. She is dressed in sheer organdie,
white shoes and stockings.)

DAISY: Good evening, everybody. (Walks up on the porch.)

ALL THE MEN: (Very pleasantly) Good evening, Miss Daisy.

DAISY: (To CLARK) Mama sent me after some meal and flour and some
bacon and sausage oil.

CLARK: Senator been here long time ago hunting you.

DAISY: (Frightened) Did he? Oo ... Mist' Clark, hurry up and fix it
for me. (She starts on in the store.)

LINDSAY: (Giving her his seat) You better wait here, Daisy.

(WALTER kicks LIGE to call his attention to LINDSAY'S attitude)

It's powerful hot in dat store. Lemme run fetch 'em out to you.

LIGE: (To LINDSAY) _Run!_ Joe Lindsay, you ain't been able to run
since de big bell rung. Look at dat gray beard.

LINDSAY: Thank God, I ain't gray all over. I'm just as good a man
right now as any of you young 'uns. (He hurries on into the store.)

WALTER: Daisy, where's yo' two body guards? It don't look natural to
see you thout nary one of 'em.

DAISY: (Archly) I ain't got no body guards. I don't know what you
talkin' about.

LIGE: Aw, don' try to come dat over us, Daisy. You know who we talkin'
'bout all right ... but if you want me to come out flat footed ...
where's Jim and Dave?

DAISY: Ain't they playin' somewhere for de white folks?

LIGE: (To WALTER) Will you listen at dis gal, Walter? (To DAISY) When
I ain't been long seen you and Dave going down to de Lake.

DAISY: (Frightened) Don't y'all run tell mama where I been.

WALTER: Well, you tell us which one you laks de best and we'll wipe
our mouf (Gesture) and say nothin'. Dem boys been de best of friends
all they life, till both of 'em took after you ... then good-bye, Katy
bar de door!

DAISY: (Affected innocence) Ain't they still playin' and dancin'
together?

LIGE: Yeah, but that's 'bout all they do 'gree on these days. That's
de way it is wid men, young and old.... I don't keer how long they
been friends and how thick they been ... a woman kin come between 'em.
David and Jonather never would have been friends so long if Jonather
had of been any great hand wid de wimmen. You ain't never seen no two
roosters that likes one another.

DAISY: I ain't tried to break 'em up.

WALTER: Course you ain't. You don't have to. All two boys need to do
is to git stuck on de same girl and they done broke up ... _right
now_! Wimmen is something can't be divided equal.

(Re-enter JOE LINDSAY and CLARK with the groceries. DAISY jumps up and
grabs the packages.)

LIGE: (To DAISY) Want some of us ... me ... to go long and tote yo'
things for you?

DAISY: (Nervously) Naw, mama is riding her high horse today. Long as I
been gone it wouldn't do for me to come walking up wid nobody. (She
exits hurriedly right.)

(All the men watch her out of sight in silence.)

CLARK: (Sighing) I God, know whut Daisy puts me in de mind of?

HAMBO: No, what? (They all lean together.)

CLARK: I God, a great big mango ... a sweet smell, you know, Th a
strong flavor, but not something you could mash up like a strawberry.
Something with a body to it.

(General laughter, but not obscene.)

HAMBO: (Admiringly) Joe Clark! I didn't know you had it in you!

(MRS. CLARK enters from store door and they all straighten up
guiltily)

CLARK: (Angrily to his wife) Now whut do you want? I God, the minute I
set down, here you come....

MRS. CLARK: Somebody want a stamp, Jody. You know you don't 'low me to
bove wid de post office. (HE rises sullenly and goes inside the
store.)

BRAZZLE: Say, Hambo, I didn't see you at our Sunday School picnic.

HAMBO: (Slicing some plug-cut tobacco) Nope, wan't there dis time.

WALTER: Looka here, Hambo. Y'all Baptist carry dis close-communion
business too far. If a person ain't half drownded in de lake and half
et up by alligators, y'all think he ain't baptized, so you can't take
communion wid him. Now I reckon you can't even drink lemonade and eat
chicken perlow wid us.

HAMBO: My Lord, boy, youse just _full_ of words. Now, in de first
place, if this year's picnic was lak de one y'all had last year ...
you ain't had no lemonade for us Baptists to turn down. You had a big
ole barrel of rain water wid about a pound of sugar in it and one
lemon cut up over de top of it.

LIGE: Man, you sho kin mold 'em!

WALTER: Well, I went to de Baptist picnic wid my mouf all set to eat
chicken, when lo and behold y'all had chitlings! Do Jesus!

LINDSAY: Hold on there a minute. There was plenty chicken at dat
picnic, which I do know is right.

WALTER: Only chicken I seen was half a chicken yo' pastor musta tried
to swaller whole cause he was choked stiff as a board when I come
long ... wid de whole deacon's board beating him in de back, trying
to knock it out his throat.

LIGE: Say, dat puts me in de mind of a Baptist brother that was crazy
'bout de preachers and de preacher was crazy 'bout feeding his face.
So his son got tired of trying to beat dese stump-knockers to de grub
on the table, so one day he throwed out some slams 'bout dese
preachers. Dat made his old man mad, so he tole his son to git out.
He boy ast him "Where must I go, papa?" He says, "Go on to hell I
reckon ... I don't keer where you go."

So de boy left and was gone seven years. He come back one cold, windy
night and rapped on de door. "Who dat?" de old man ast him "It's me,
Jack." De old man opened de door, so glad to see his son agin, and
tole Jack to come in. He did and looked all round de place. Seven or
eight preachers was sitting round de fire eatin' and drinkin'.

"Where you been all dis time, Jack?" de old man ast him.

"I been to hell," Jack tole him.

"Tell us how it is down there, Jack."

"Well," he says, "It's just like it is here ... you cain't git to de
fire for de preachers."

HAMBO: Boy, you kin lie just like de cross-ties from Jacksonville to
Key West. De presidin' elder must come round on his circuit teaching
y'all how to tell 'em, cause you couldn't lie dat good just natural.

WALTER: Can't nobody beat Baptist folks lying ... and I ain't never
found out how come you think youse so important.

LINDSAY: Ain't we got de finest and de biggest church? Macedonia
Baptist will hold more folks than any two buildings in town.

LIGE: Thass right, y'all got a heap more church than you got members
to go in it.

HAMBO: Thass all right ... y'all ain't got neither de church nor de
members. Everything that's had in this town got to be held in our
church.

(Re-enter JOE CLARK.)

CLARK: What you-all talkin'?

HAMBO: Come on out, Tush Hawg, lemme beat you some checkers. I'm tired
of fending and proving wid dese boys ain't got no hair on they chest
yet.

CLARK: I God, you mean you gointer get beat. You can't handle me ...
I'm a tush hawg.

HAMBO: Well, I'm going to draw dem tushes right now. (To two small
boys using checker board on edge of porch.) Here you chilluns, let de
Mayor and me have that board. Go on out an' play an' give us grown
folks a little peace. (The children go down stage and call out:)

SMALL BOY: Hey, Senator. Hey, Marthy. Come on let's play chick-me,
chick-me, cranie-crow.

CHILD'S VOICE: (Off stage) All right! Come on, Jessie! (Enter several
children, led by SENATOR, and a game begins in front of the store as
JOE CLARK and HAMBO play checkers.)

JOE CLARK: I God! Hambo, you can't play no checkers.

HAMBO: (As they seat themselves at the check board) Aw, man, if you
wasn't de Mayor I'd beat you all de time.

(The children get louder and louder, drowning out the men's voices.)

SMALL GIRL: I'm gointer be de hen.

BOY: And I'm gointer be de hawk. Lemme git maself a stick to mark wid.

(The boy who is the hawk squats center stage with a short twig in his
hand. The largest girl lines up the other children behind her.)

GIRL: (Mother Hen) (Looking back over her flock): Y'all ketch holt of
one 'Nother's clothes so de hawk can't git yuh. (They do.) You all
straight now?

CHILDREN: Yeah. (The march around the hawk commences.)

HEN AND CHICKS:
  Chick mah chick mah craney crow
  Went to de well to wash ma toe
  When I come back ma chick was gone
  What time, ole witch?

HAWK: (Making a tally on the ground) One!

HEN AND CHICKS: (Repeat song and march.)

HAWK: (Scoring again) Two!

(Can be repeated any number of times.)

HAWK: Four. (He rises and imitates a hawk flying and trying to catch a
chicken. Calling in a high voice:) Chickee.

HEN: (Flapping wings to protect her young) My chickens sleep.

HAWK: Chickee. (During all this the hawk is feinting and darting in
his efforts to catch a chicken, and the chickens are dancing
defensively, the hen trying to protect them.)

HEN: My chicken's sleep.

HAWK: I shall have a chick.

HEN: You shan't have a chick.

HAWK: I'm goin' home. (Flies off)

HEN: Dere's de road.

HAWK: My pot's a boilin'.

HEN: Let it boil.

HAWK: My guts a growlin'.

HEN: Let 'em growl.

HAWK: I must have a chick.

HEN: You shan't have n'airn.

HAWK: My mama's sick.

HEN: Let her die.

HAWK: Chickie!

HEN: My chicken's sleep.

(HAWK darts quickly around the hen and grabs a chicken and leads him
off and places his captive on his knees at the store porch. After a
brief bit of dancing he catches another, then a third, etc.)

HAMBO: (At the checker board, his voice rising above the noise of the
playing children, slapping his sides jubilantly) Ha! Ha! I got you
now. Go ahead on and move, Joe Clark ... jus' go ahead on and move.

LOUNGERS: (Standing around two checker players) Ol' Deacon's got you
now.

ANOTHER VOICE: Don't see how he can beat the Mayor like that.

ANOTHER VOICE: Got him in the Louisville loop. (These remarks are
drowned by the laughter of the playing children directly in front of
the porch. MAYOR JOE CLARK disturbed in his concentration on the
checkers and peeved at being beaten suddenly turns toward the
children, throwing up his hands.)

CLARK: Get on 'way from here, you limbs of Satan, making all that
racket so a man can't hear his ears. Go on, go on!

(THE MAYOR looks about excitedly for the town marshall. Seeing him
playing cards on the other side of porch, he bellows:)

Lum Boger, whyn't you git these kids away from here! What kind of a
marshall is you? All this passle of young'uns around here under grown
people's feet, creatin' disorder in front of my store.

(LUM BOGER puts his cards down lazily, comes down stage and scatters
the children away. One saucy little girl refuses to move.)

LUM BOGER: Why'nt you go on away from here, Matilda? Didn't you hear
me tell you-all to move?

LITTLE MATILDA: (Defiantly) I ain't goin' nowhere. You ain't none of
my mama. (Jerking herself free from him as LUM touches her.) My mama
in the store and she told me to wait out here. So take that, ol' Lum.

LUM BOGER: You impudent little huzzy, you! You must smell yourself ...
youse so fresh.

MATILDA: The wind musta changed and you smell your own top lip.

LUM BOGER: Don't make me have to grab you and take you down a
buttonhole lower.

MATILDA: (Switching her little head) Go ahead on and grab me. You sho
can't kill me, and if you kill me, you sho can't eat me. (She marches
into the store.)

SENATOR: (Derisively from behind stump) Ol' dumb Lum! Hey! Hey!

(LITTLE BOY at edge of stage thumbs his nose at the marshall.)

(LUM lumbers after the small boy. Both exit.)

HAMBO: (To CLARK who has been thinking all this while what move to
make) You ain't got but one move ... go ahead on and make it. What's
de matter, Mayor?

CLARK: (Moving his checker) Aw, here.

HAMBO: (Triumphant) Now! Look at him, boys. I'm gonna laugh in notes.
(Laughing to the scale and jumping a checker each time) Do, sol, fa,
me, lo ... one! (Jumping another checker) La, sol, fa, me, do ... two!
(Another jump.) Do sol, re, me, lo ... three! (Jumping a third.) Lo
sol, fa, me, re ... four! (The crowd begins to roar with laughter. LUM
BOGER returns, looking on. Children come drifting back again playing
chick-me-chick-me-cranie crow.)

VOICE: Oh, ha! Done got the ol' tush hog.

ANOTHER VOICE: Thought you couldn't be beat, Brother Mayor?

CLARK: (Peeved, gets up and goes into the store mumbling) Oh, I coulda
beat you if I didn't have this store on my mind. Saturday afternoon
and I got work to do. Lum, ain't I told you to keep them kids from
playin' right in front of this store?

(LUM makes a pass at the nearest half-grown boy. The kids dart around
him teasingly.)

ANOTHER VOICE: Eh, heh.... Hambo done run him on his store ... done
run the ol' coon in his hole.

ANOTHER VOICE: That ain't good politics, Hambo, beatin' the Mayor.

ANOTHER VOICE: Well, Hambo, you don't got to be so hard at checkers,
come on let's see what you can do with de cards. Lum Boger there got
his hands full nursin' the chilluns.

ANOTHER VOICE: (At the table) We ain't playin' for money, nohow,
Deacon. We just playin' a little Florida Flip.

HAMBO: Ya all can't play no Florida Flip. When I was a sinner there
wasn't a man in this state could beat me playin' that game. But I'm a
deacon in Macedonia Baptist now and I don't bother with the cards no
more.

VOICE AT CARD TABLE: All right, then, come on here Tony (To man with
basket on steps.) let me catch your jack.

TAYLOR: (Looking toward door) I don't reckon I got time. I guess my
wife gonna get through buying out that store some time or other and
want to go home.

OLD MAN: (On opposite side of porch from card game) I bet my wife
would know better than expect me to sit around and wait for her with a
basket. Whyn't you tell her to tote it on home herself?

TAYLOR: (Sighing and shaking his head.) Eh, Lawd!

VOICE AT CARD TABLE: Look like we can't get nobody to come into this
game. Seem like everybody's scared a us. Come on back here, Lum, and
take your hand. (LUM makes a final futile gesture at the children.)

LUM: Ain't I tole you little haitians to stay away from here?

(CHILDREN scatter teasingly only to return to their play in front of
the store later on. LUM comes up on the porch and re-joins the card
game. Just as he gets seated, MRS. CLARK comes to the door of the
store and calls him.)

MRS. CLARK: (Drawlingly) Columbus!

LUM: (Wearily) Ma'am?

MRS. CLARK: De Mayor say for you to go round in de back yard and tie
up old lady Jackson's mule what's trampin' aup all de tomatoes in my
garden.

LUM: All right. (Leaving card game.) Wait till I come back, folkses.

LIGE: Oh, hum! (Yawning and putting down the deck of cards) Lum's sho
a busy marshall. Say, ain't Dave and Jim been round here yet? I feel
kinder like hearin' a little music 'bout now.

BOY: Naw, they ain't been here today. You-all know they ain't so thick
nohow as they was since Daisy Bailey come back and they started
runnin' after her.

WOMAN: You mean since she started runnin' after them, the young hussy.

MRS. CLARK: (In doorway) She don't mean 'em no good.

WALTER: That's a shame, ain't it now? (Enter LUM from around back of
store. He jumps on the porch and takes his place at the card box.)

LUM: (To the waiting players) All right, boys! Turn it on and let the
bad luck happen.

LIGE: My deal. (He begins shuffling the cards with an elaborate
fan-shape movement.)

VOICE AT TABLE: Look out there, Lige, you shuffling mighty lot. Don't
carry the cub to us.

LIGE: Aw, we ain't gonna cheat you ... we gonna beat you. (He slams
down the cards for LUM BOGER to cut.) Wanta cut 'em?

LUM: No, ain't no need of cutting a rabbit out when you can twist him
out. Deal 'em. (LIGE deals out the cards.)

CLARK'S VOICE: (Inside the store) You, Mattie! (MRS. CLARK, who has
been standing in the DOE, quickly turns and goes inside.)

LIGE: Y-e-e-e! Spades! (The game is started.)

LUM: Didn't snatch that jack, did you?

LIGE: Aw, no, ain't snatched no jack. Play.

WALTER: (LUM'S partner) Well, here it is, partner. What you want me to
play for you?

LUM: Play jus' like I'm in New York, partner. But we gotta try to
catch that jack.

LIGE: (Threateningly) Stick out your hand and draw back a nub.

(WALTER THOMAS plays.)

WALTER: I'm playin' a diamond for you, partner.

LUM: I done tole you you ain't got no partner.

LIGE: Heh, Heh! Partner, we got 'em. Pull off wid your king. Dey got
to play 'em. (When that trick is turned, triumphantly:) Didn't I tell
you, partner? (Stands on his feet and slams down with his ace
violently) Now, come up under this ace. Aw, hah, look at ol' low,
partner. I knew I was gonna catch 'em. (When LUM plays) Ho, ho, there
goes the queen.... Now, the jack's a gentleman.... Now, I'm playin' my
knots. (Everybody plays and the hand is ended.) Partner, high, low,
jack and the game and four.

WALTER: Give me them cards. I believe you-all done give me the cub
that time. Look at me ... this is Booker T Washington dealing these
cards. (Shuffles cards grandly and gives them to LIGE to cut.) Wanta
cut 'em?

LIGE: Yeah, cut 'em and shoot 'em. I'd cut behind my ma. (He cuts the
cards.)

WALTER: (Turning to player at left, FRANK, LIGE'S partner) What you
saying, Frank?

FRANK: I'm beggin'. (LIGE is trying to peep at cards.)

WALTER: (Turning to LIGE) Stop peepin' at them cards, Lige. (To FRANK)
Did you say you was beggin' or standin'?

FRANK: I'm beggin'.

WALTER: Get up off your knees. Go ahead and tell 'em I sent you.

FRANK: Well, that makes us four.

WALTER: I don't care if you is. (Pulls a quarter out of his pocket and
lays it down on the box.) Twenty-five cents says I know the best one.
Let's go. (Everybody puts down a quarter.)

FRANK: What you want me to play for you partner?

LIGE: Play me a club. (The play goes around to dealer, WALTER, who
gets up and takes the card off the top of the deck and slams it down
on the table.)

WALTER: Get up ol' deuce of deamonds and gallop off with your load.
(TO LUM) Partner, how many times you seen the deck?

LUM: Two times.

WALTER: Well, then I'm gonna pull off, partner. Watch this ol' queen.
(Everyone plays) Ha! Ha! Wash day and no soap. (Takes the jack of
diamonds and sticks him up on his forehead. Stands up on his feet.)
Partner, I'm dumping to you ... play your king. (When it comes to his
play LUM, too, stands up. The others get up and they, too, excitedly
slam their cards down.) Now, come on in this kitchen and let me splice
that cabbage! (He slams down the ace of diamonds. Pats the jack on his
for head, sings:) Hey, hey, back up, jenny, get your load. (Talking)
Dump to that jack, boys, dump to it. High, low, jack and the game and
four. One to go. We're four wid you, boys.

LIGE: Yeah, but you-all playin' catch-up.

FRANK: Gimme them cards ... lemme deal some.

LIGE: Frank, now you really got responsibility on you. They's got one
game on us.

FRANK: Aw, man, I'm gonna deal 'em up a mess. This deal's in the White
House. (He shuffles and puts the cards down for WALTER to cut.) Cut
'em.

WALTER: Nope, I never cut green timber. (FRANK deals and turns the
card up.)

FRANK: Hearts, boys. (He turns up an ace.)

LUM: Aw, you snatched that ace, nigger.

WALTER: Yeah, they done carried the cub to us, partner.

LIGE: Oh, he didn't do no such a thing. That ace was turned fair. We
jus' too hard for you ... we eats our dinner out a the blacksmith
shop.

WALTER: Aw, you all cheatin'. You know it wasn't fair.

FRANK: Aw, shut up, you all jus' whoopin' and hollerin' for nothin'.
Tryin' to bully the game. (FRANK and LIGE rise and shake hands
grandly.)

LIGE: Mr. Hoover, you sho is a noble president. We done stuck these
niggers full of cobs. They done got scared to play us.

LIGE (?) Scared to play you? Get back down to this table, let me
spread my mess.

LOUNGER: Yonder comes Elder Simms. You all better squat that rabbit.
They'll be having you all up in the church for playin' cards.

(FRANK grabs up the cards and puts them in his pocket quickly.
Everybody picks up the money and looks unconcerned as the preacher
enters. Enter ELDER SIMMS with his two prim-looking little children by
the hand.)

ELDER SIMMS: How do, children. Right warm for this time in November,
ain't it?

VOICE: Yes sir, Reverend, sho is. How's Sister Simms?

SIMMS: She's feelin' kinda po'ly today. (Goes on in store with his
children)

VOICE: (Whispering loudly) Don't see how that great big ole powerful
woman could be sick. Look like she could go bear huntin' with her
fist.

ANOTHER VOICE: She look jus' as good as you-all's Baptist pastor's
wife. Pshaw, you ain't seen no big woman, nohow, man. I seen one once
so big she went to whip her little boy and he run up under her belly
and hid six months 'fore she could find him.

ANOTHER VOICE: Well, I knowed a woman so little that she had to get up
on a soap box to look over a grain of sand.

(REV. SIMMS comes out of store, each child behind him sucking a stick
of candy.)

SIMMS: (To his children) Run on home to your mother and don't get
dirty on the way. (The two children start primly off down the street
but just out of sight one of them utters a loud cry.)

SIMMS'S CHILD: (Off stage) Papa, papa. Nunkie's trying to lick my
candy.

SIMMS: I told you to go on and leave them other children alone.

VOICE ON PORCH: (Kidding) Lum, whyn't you tend to your business.

(TOWN MARSHALL rises and shoos the children off again.)

LUM: You all varmints leave them nice chillun alone.

LIGE: (Continuing the lying on porch) Well, you all done seen so much,
but I bet you ain't never seen a snake as big as the one I saw when I
was a boy up in middle Georgia. He was so big couldn't hardly move his
self. He laid in one spot so long he growed moss on him and everybody
thought he was a log, till one day I set down on him and went to
sleep, and when I woke up that snake done crawled to Florida. (Loud
laughter.)

FRANK: (Seriously) Layin' all jokes aside though now, you all remember
that rattlesnake I killed last year was almost as big as that Georgia
snake.

VOICE: How big, you say it was, Frank?

FRANK: Maybe not quite as big as that, but jus' about fourteen feet.

VOICE: (Derisively) Gimme that lyin' snake. That snake wasn't but four
foot long when you killed him last year and you done growed him ten
feet in a year.

ANOTHER VOICE: Well, I don't know about that. Some of the snakes
around here is powerful long. I went out in my front yard yesterday
right after the rain and killed a great big ol' cottonmouth.

SIMMS: This sho is a snake town. I certainly can't raise no chickens
for 'em. They kill my little biddies jus' as fast as they hatch out.
And yes ... if I hadn't cut them weeds out of the street in front of
my parsonage, me or some of my folks woulda been snake-bit right at
our front door. (To whole crowd) Whyn't you all cut down these weeds
and clean up these streets?

HAMBO: Well, the Mayor ain't said nothin' 'bout it.

SIMMS: When the folks misbehaves in this town I think they oughta lock
'em up in a jail and make 'em work their fine out on the streets, then
these weeds would be cut down.

VOICE: How we gonna do that when we ain't got no jail?

SIMMS: Well, you sho needs a jail ... you-all needs a whole lot of
improvements round this town. I ain't never pastored no town so
way-back as this one here.

CLARK: (Who has lately emerged from the store, fanning himself,
overhears this last remark and bristles up) What's that you say 'bout
this town?

SIMMS: I say we needs some improvements here in this town ... that's
what.

CLARK: (In a powerful voice) And what improvements you figgers we
needs?

SIMMS: A whole heap. Now, for one thing we really does need a jail,
Mayor. We oughta stop runnin' these people out of town that
misbehaves, and lock 'em up. Others towns has jails, everytown I ever
pastored had a jail. Don't see how come we can't have one.

CLARK: (Towering angrily above the preacher) Now, wait a minute,
Simms. Don't you reckon the man who knows how to start a town knows
how to run it? I paid two hundred dollars out of this right hand for
this land and walked out here and started this town befo' you was
born. I ain't like some of you new niggers, come here when grapes'
ripe. I was here to cut new ground, and I been Mayor ever since.

SIMMS: Well, there ain't no sense in no one man stayin' Mayor all the
time.

CLARK: Well, it's my town and I can be mayor jus' as long as I want
to. It was me that put this town on the map.

SIMMS: What map you put it on, Joe Clark? I ain't seen it on no map.

CLARK: (Indignant) I God! Listen here, Elder Simms. If you don't like
the way I run this town, just' take your flat feets right on out and
git yonder crost the woods. You ain't been here long enough to say
nothin' nohow.

HAMBO: (From a nail keg) Yeah, you Methodist niggers always telling
people how to run things.

TAYLOR: (Practically unheard by the others) We do so know how to run
things, don't we? Ain't Brother Mayor a Methodist, and ain't the
school-teacher a ...? (His remarks are drowned out by the others.)

SIMMS: No, we don't like the way you're runnin' things. Now looka
here, (Pointing at the Marshall) You got that lazy Lum Boger here for
marshall and he ain't old enough to be dry behind his ears yet ... and
all these able-bodied means in this town! You won't 'low nobody else
to run a store 'ceptin' you. And looka yonder (happening to notice the
street light) only street lamp in town, you got in front of your
place. (Indignantly) We pay the taxes and you got the lamp.

VILLAGER: Don't you-all fuss now. How come you two always yam-yamming
at each other?

CLARK: How come this fly-by-night Methodist preacher over here ...
ain't been here three months ... tries to stand up on my store porch
and tries to tell me how to run my town? (MATTIE CLARK, the Mayor's
wife, comes timidly to the door, wiping her hands on her apron.) Ain't
no man gonna tell me how to run my town. I God, I 'lected myself in
and I'm gonna run it. (Turns and sees wife standing in door.
Commandingly.) I God, Mattie, git on back in there and wait on that
store!

MATTIE: (Timidly) Jody, somebody else wantin' stamps.

CLARK: I God, woman, what good is you? Gwan, git in. Look like between
women and preachers a man can't have no peace. (Exit CLARK.)

SIMMS: (Continuing his argument) Now, when I pastored in Jacksonville
you oughta see what kinda jails they got there....

LOUNGER: White folks needs jails. We colored folks don't need no jail.

ANOTHER VILLAGER: Yes, we do, too. Elder Simms is right....

(The argument becomes a hubbub of voices.)

TAYLOR: (Putting down his basket) Now, I tell you a jail....

MRS. TAYLOR: (Emerging from the store door, arms full of groceries,
looking at her husband) Yeah, and if you don't shut up and git these
rations home I'm gonna be worse on you than a jail and six judges.
Pickup that basket and let's go. (TONY meekly picks up the basket and
he and his wife exit as the sound of an approaching guitar is heard
off stage.)

(Two carelessly dressed, happy-go-lucky fellows enter together. One is
fingering a guitar without playing any particular tune, and the other
has his hat cocked over his eyes in a burlesque, dude-like manner.
There are casual greetings.)

WALTER: Hey, there, bums, how's tricks?

LIGE: What yo' sayin', boys?

HAMBO: Good evenin' sons.

LIGE: How did you-all make out this evenin', boys?

JIM: Oh, them white folks at the party shelled out right well. Kept
Dave busy pickin' it up. How much did we make today, Dave?

DAVE: (Striking his pocket) I don't know, boy, but feels right heavy
here. Kept me pickin' up money just like this.... (As JIM picks a few
dance chords, Dave gives a dance imitation of how he picked up the
coins from the ground as the white folks threw them.) We count it
after while. Woulda divided up with you already if you hadn't left me
when you seen Daisy comin' by. Let's sit down on the porch and rest
now.

LIGE: She sho is lookin' stylish and pretty since she come back with
her white folks from up North. Wearin' the swellest clothes. And that
coal-black hair of hers jus' won't quit.

MATTIE CLARK: (In doorway) I don't see what the mens always hanging
after Daisy Taylor for.

CLARK: (Turning around on the porch) I God, you back here again. Who's
tendin' that store? (MATTIE disappears inside.)

DAVE: Well, she always did look like new money to me when she was here
before.

JIM: Well, that's all you ever did get was a look.

DAVE: That's all you know! I bet I get more than that now.

JIM: You might git it but I'm the man to use it. I'm a bottom fish.

DAVE: Aw, man. You musta been walking round here fast asleep when
Daisy was in this county last. You ain't seen de go I had with her.

JIM: No, I ain't seen it. Bet you didn't have no letter from her while
she been away.

DAVE: Bet you didn't neither.

JIM: Well, it's just cause she can't write. If she knew how to scratch
with a pencil I'd had a ton of 'em.

DAVE: Shaw, man! I'd had a post office full of 'em.

OLD WOMAN: You-all ought to be shame, carrying on over a brazen heifer
like Daisy Taylor. Jus' cause she's been up North and come back, I
reckon you cutting de fool sho 'nough now. She ain't studying none of
you-all nohow. All she wants is what you got in your pocket.

JIM: I likes her but she won't git nothin' outa me. She never did. I
wouldn't give a poor consumpted cripple crab a crutch to cross the
River Jurdon.

DAVE: I know I ain't gonna give no woman nothin'. I wouldn't give a
dog a doughnut if he treed a terrapin.

LIGE: Youse a cottontail dispute ... both of you. You'd give her
anything you got. You'd give her Georgia with a fence 'round it.

OLD MAN: Yeah, and she'd take it, too.

LINDSAY: Don't distriminate the woman like that. That ain't nothing
but hogism. Ain't nothin' the matter with Daisy, she's all right.

(Enter TEETS and BOOTSIE tittering coyly and switching themselves.)

BOOTSIE: Is you seen my mama?

OLD WOMAN: You know you ain't lookin' for no mama. Jus' come back down
here to show your shape and fan around awhile. (BOOTSIE and TEETS
going into the store.)

BOOTSIE & TEETS: No, we ain't. We'se come to get our mail.

OLD WOMAN: (After girls enter store) Why don't you all keep up some
attention to these nice girls here, Bootsie and Teets. They wants to
marry.

DAVE: Aw, who thinkin' 'bout marryin' now? They better stay home and
eat their own pa's rations. I gotta buy myself some shoes.

JIM: The woman I'm gonna marry ain't born yet and her maw is dead.

(GIRLS come out giggling and exit.) (JIM begins to strum his guitar
lightly at first as the talk goes on.)

CLARK: (To DAVE and JIM) Two of the finest gals that ever lived and
friendly jus' like you-all is. You two boys better take 'em back and
stop them shiftless ways.

HAMBO: Yeah, hurry up and do somethin'! I wants to taste a piece yo'
weddin' cake.

JIM: (Embarrassed but trying to be jocular) Whut you trying to rush
me up so fast?... Look at Will Cody here (Pointing to little man on
porch) he been promising to bring his already wife down for two
months ... and nair one of us ain't seen her yet.

DAVE: Yeah, how you speck me to haul in a brand new wife when he can't
lead a wagon-broke wife eighteen miles? Me, I'm going git one soon's
Cody show me his'n. (General sly laughter at CODY'S expense.)

WALTER: (Snaps his fingers and pretends to remember something) Thass
right, Cody. I been intending to tell you.... I know where you kin buy
a ready-built house for you and yo' wife. (Calls into the store.) Hey,
Clark, cime on out here and tell Cody 'bout dat Bradley house. (To
CODY.) I know you wants to git a place of yo' own so you kin settle
down.

HAMBO: He done moved so much since he been here till every time he
walk out in his back yeard his chickens lay down and cross they legs.

LINDSAY: Cody, I thought you tole us you was going up to Sanford to
bring dat 'oman down here last Sat'day.

LIGE: That ain't de way he tole me 'bout it. Look, fellers, (Getting
up and putting one hand on his hips and one finger of the other hand
against his chin coquettishly) Where you reckon I'll be next Sat'day
night?... Sittin' up side of Miz Cody. (Great burst of laughter.)

SYKES JONES: (Laughing) Know what de folks tole me in Sanford? Dat was
another man's wife. (Guffaws.)

CODY: (Feebly) Aw, you don't know whut you talkin' bout.

JONES: Naw, I don't know, but de folks in Sanford does. (Laughing) Dey
tell me when dat lady's husband come home Sat'day night, ole Cody
jumped out de window. De man grabbed his old repeater and run out in
de yard to head him off. When Cody seen him come round de corner de
house (Gesture) he flopped his wings and flew up on de fence. De man
thowed dat shotgun dead on him. (Laughs) Den, man! Cody flopped his
wings lak a buzzard (Gesture) and sailed on off. De man dropped to his
knees lak dis (Gesture of kneeling on one knee and taking aim) Die!
die! die! (Supposedly sound of shots as the gun is moved in a circle
following the course of Cody's supposed flight) Cody just flew right
on off and lit on a hill two miles off. Then, man! (Gesture of swift
flight) In ten minutes he was back here in Eatonville and in he bed.

WALTER: I passed there and seen his house shakin', but I didn't know
how come.

HAMBO: Aw, leave de boy alone.... If you don't look out some of y'all
going to have to break his record.

LIGE: I'm prepared to break it now. (General laughter.)

JIM: Well, anyhow, I don't want to marry and leave Dave ... yet
awhile. (Picking a chord.)

DAVE: And I ain't gonna leave Jim. We been palling around together
ever since we hollered titty mama, ain't we, boy?

JIM: Sho is. (Music of the guitar increases in volume. DAVE shuffles a
few steps and the two begin to sing.)

JIM:
  Rabbit on the log.
  I ain't got no dog.
  How am I gonna git him?
  God knows.

DAVE:
  Rabbit on the log.
  Ain't got no dog.
  Shoot him with my rifle
  Bam! Bam!

(Some of the villagers join in song and others get up and march around
the porch in time with the music. BOOTSIE and TEETS re-enter, TEETS
sticking her letter down the neck of her blouse. JOE LINDSAY grabs
TEETS and WALTER THOMAS grabs BOOTSIE. There is dancing, treating and
general jollification. Little children dance the parse-me-la. The
music fills the air just as the sun begins to go down. Enter DAISY
TAYLOR coming down the road toward the store.)

CLARK: (Bawls out from the store porch) I God, there's Daisy again.

(Most of the dancing stops, the music slows down and then stops
completely. DAVE and JIM greet DAISY casually as she approaches the
porch.)

JIM: Well, Daisy, we knows you, too.

DAVE: Gal, youse jus' as pretty as a speckled pup.

DAISY: (Giggling) I see you two boys always playin' and singin'
together. That music sounded right good floating down the road.

JIM: Yeah, child, we'se been playin' for the white folks all week.
We'se playin' for the colored now.

DAVE: (Showing off, twirling his dancing feet) Yeah, we're standin' on
our abstract and livin' on our income.

OLD MAN: Um-ump, but they ain't never workin'. Just round here playing
as usual.

JIM: Some folks think you ain't workin' lessen you smellin' a mule.
(He sits back down on box and picks at his guitar.) Think you gotta
be beatin' a man to his barn every mornin'.

VOICE: Glad to be round home with we-all again, ain't you Daisy?

DAISY: Is I glad? I jus' got off special early this evenin' to come
over here and see everybody. I was kinda 'fraid sundown would catch me
'fore I got round that lake. Don't know how I'm gonna walk back to my
workin' place in the dark by muself.

DAVE: Don't no girl as good-lookin' as you is have to go home by
herself tonight.

JIM: No, cause I'm here.

DAVE: (To DAISY) Don't you trust yourself round that like wid all them
'gators and moccasins with that nigger there, Daisy (Pointing at JIM)
He's jus' full of rabbit blood. What you need is a real man ... with
good feet. (Cutting a dance step.)

DAISY: I ain't thinking 'bout goin' home yet. I'm goin' in the store.

JIM: What you want in the store?

DAISY: I want some gum.

DAVE: (Starting toward door) Girl, you don't have to go in there to
git no gum. I'll go in there and buy you a carload of gum. What kind
you want?

DAISY: Bubble gum. (DAVE goes in the store with his hand in his
pocket. The sun is setting and the twilight deepens.)

JIM: (Pulling package out of his pocket and laughing) Here your gum,
baby. What it takes to please the ladies, I totes it. I don't have to
go get it, like Dave. What you gimme for it?

DAISY: A bushel and a peck, and a hug around the neck. (She embraces
JIM playfully. He hands her the gum, patting his shoulder as he sits
on box.) Oh, thank you. Youse a ready man.

JIM: Yeah, there's a lot of good parts to me. You can have West Tampa
if you want it.

DAISY: You always was a nice quiet boy, Jim.

DAVE: (Emerging from the store with a package of gum) Here's your gum,
Daisy.

JIM: Oh, youse late. She's done got gum now. Chaw that yourself.

DAVE: (Slightly peeved and surprised) Hunh, you mighty fast here now
with Daisy but you wasn't that fast gettin' out of that white man's
chicken house last week.

JIM: Who you talkin' 'bout?

DAVE: Hoo-oo? (Facetiously) You ain't no owl. Your feet don't fit no
limb.

JIM: Aw, nigger, hush.

DAVE: Aw, hush, yourself. (He walks away for a minute as DAISY turns
to meet some newcomers. DAVE throws his package of gum down on the
ground. It breaks and several children scramble for the pieces. An old
man, very drunk, carrying an empty jug enters on left and staggers
tipsily across stage.) (MAYOR JOE CLARK emerges from the store and
looks about for his marshall.)

CLARK: (Bellowing) Lum Boger!

LUM BOGER: (Eating a stalk of cane) Yessir!

CLARK: I God, Lum, take your lazy self off that keg and go light that
town lamp. All summer long you eatin' up my melon, and all winter long
you chawin' up my cane. What you think this town is payin' you for?
Laying round here doin' nothin'? Can't you see it's gettin' dark?

(LUM BOGER rises lazily and takes the soap box down stage, stands on
it to light the lamp, discovers no oil in it and goes in store. In a
few moments he comes out of store, fills the lamp and lights it.)

DAISY: (Coming back toward JIM) Ain't you all gonna play and sing a
little somethin' for me? I ain't heard your all's music much for so
long.

JIM: Play anything you want, Daisy. Don't make no difference what 'tis
I can pick it. Where's that old coon, Dave? (Looking around for his
partner.)

LIGE: (Calling Dave, who is leaning against post at opposite end of
porch) Come here, an' get warmed up for Daisy.

DAVE: Aw, ma throat's tired.

JIM: Leave the baby be.

DAISY: Come on, sing a little, Dave.

DAVE: (Going back toward Jim) Well, seeing who's asking ... all right.
What song yo like, Daisy?

DAISY: Um-m. Lemme think.

VOICE ON PORCH: "Got on the train, didn't have no fare".

DAISY: (Gaily) Yes, that one. That's a good one.

JIM: (Begins to tune up. DAVE touches Daisy's hand.)

VOICE: (In fun) Hunh, you all wouldn't play at the hall last week when
we asked you.

VOICE OF SPITEFUL OLD WOMAN: Daisy wasn't here then.

ANOTHER VOICE: (Teasingly) All you got to do to some men is to shake a
skirt tail in their face and they goes off their head.

DAVE: (To JIM who is still tuning up) Come if you're comin' boy, let's
go if you gwine. (The full melody of the guitar comes out in a lively,
old-fashioned tune.)

VOICE: All right now, boys, do it for Daisy jus' as good as you do for
dem white folks over in Maitland.

DAVE & JIM: (Beginning to sing)
  Got on the train,
  Didn't have no fare,
  But I rode some,
  I rode some.
  Got on the train,
  Didn't have no fare,
  But I rode some,
  But I rode some.
  Got on the train,
  Didn't have no fare,
  Conductor asked me what I'm doin' there,
  But I rode some!

  Grabbed me by the neck
  And led me to the door.
  But I rode some,
  But I rode some.
  Grabbed me by the neck
  And led me to the door.
  But I rode some,
  But I rode some.
  Grabbed me by the neck,
  And led me to the door.
  Rapped me cross the head with a forty-four,
  But I rode some.

  First thing I saw in jail
  Was a pot of peas.
  But I rode some,
  But I rode some.
  First thing I saw in jail
  Was a pot of peas.
  But I rode some,
  But I rode some.
  The peas was good,
  The meat was fat,
  Fell in love with the chain gang jus' for that,
  But I rode some.

(DAVE acts out the song in dancing pantomime and when it ends there
are shouts and general exclamations of approval from the crowd.)

VOICES: I don't blame them white folks for goin' crazy 'bout that....

OLD MAN: Oh, when I was a young boy I used to swing the gals round on
that piece.

DAISY: (TO JIM) Seem like your playin' gits better and better.

DAVE: (Quickly) And how 'bout my singin'? (Everybody laughs.)

VOICES IN THE CROWD: Ha! Ha! Ol' Dave's gittin' jealous when she
speaks o' Jim.

JIM: (To DAVE, in fun) Ain't nothin' to it but my playin'. You ain't
got no singin' voice. If that's singin', God's a gopher.

DAVE: (Half-seriously) My singin' is a whole lot better'n your
playin'. You jus' go along and fram. The reason why the white folks
gives us money is cause I'm singin'.

JIM: Yeah?

DAVE: And you can't dance.

VOICE IN THE CROWD: You oughta dance. Big as your feet is, Dave.

DAISY: (Diplomatically) Both of you all is wonderful and I would like
to see Dave dance a little.

DAVE: There now, I told you. What did I tell you. (To JIM) Stop
woofing and pick a little tune there so that I can show Daisy
somethin'.

JIM: Pick a tune? I bet if you fool with me I'll pick your bones jus'
like a buzzard did the rabbit. You can't sing and now you wants to
dance.

DAVE: Yeah, and I'll lam your head. Come on and play,
good-for-nothing.

JIM: All right, then. You say you can dance ... show these people what
you can do. But don't bring that little stuff I been seein' you doin'
all these years. (JIM plays and DAVE dances, various members of the
crowd keep time with their hands and feet, DAISY looks on enjoying
herself immensely.)

DAISY: (As DAVE cuts a very fancy step) I ain't seen nothin' like this
up North. Dave you sho hot.

(As DAVE cuts a more complicated step the crowd applauds, but just as
the show begins to get good, suddenly JIM stops playing.)

DAVE: (Surprised) What's the matter, buddy?

JIM: (Envious of the attention DAVE has been getting from DAISY,
disgustedly) Oh, nigger, I'm tired of seein' you cut the fool. 'Sides
that, I been playin' all afternoon for the white folks.

DAISY: But I though you was playin' for me now, Jim.

JIM: Yeah, I'd play all night long for you, but I'm gettin' sick of
Dave round here showin' off. Let him git somethin' and play for
himself if he can. (An OLD MAN with a lighted lantern enters.)

DAISY: (Coyly) Well, honey, play some more for me, then, and don't
mind Dave. I reckon he done danced enough. Play me "Shake That
Thing".

OLD MAN WITH LANTERN: Sho, you ain't stopped, is you, boy? Music sound
mighty good floatin' down that dark road.

OLD WOMAN: Yeah, Jim, go on play a little more. Don't get to acting so
niggerish this evening.

DAVE: Aw, let the ol' darky alone. Nobody don't want to hear him play,
nohow. I know I don't.

JIM: Well, I'm gonna play. (And he begins to pick "Shake That Thing".
TEETS and BOOTSIE begin to dance with LIGE MOSELY and FRANK WARRICK.
As the tune gets good, DAVE cannot resist the music either.)

DAVE: Old nigger's eveil but he sho can play. (He begins to do a few
steps by himself, then twirls around in front of DAISY and approaches
her. DAISY, overcome by the music, begins to step rhythmically toward
DAVE and together they dance unobserved by JIM, absorbed in picking
his guitar.)

DAISY: Look here, baby, at this new step I learned up North.

DAVE: You can show me anything, sugar lump.

DAISY: Hold me tight now. (But just as they begin the new movement JIM
notices DAISY and DAVE. He stops playing again and lays his guitar
down.)

VOICES IN THE CROWD: (Disgustedly) Aw, come on, Jim.... You must be
jealous....

JIM: No, I ain't jealous. I jus' get tired of seein' that ol' nigger
clownin' all the time.

DAVE: (Laughing and pointing to JIM on porch) Look at that mad baby.
Take that lip up off the ground. Got your mouth stuck out jus' because
some one is enjoying themselves. (He comes up and pushes JIM
playfully.)

JIM: You better go head and let me alone. (TO DAISY) Come here,
Daisy!

LIGE: That's just what I say. Niggers can't have no fun without
someone getting mad ... specially over a woman.

JIM: I ain't mad.... Daisy, 'scuse me, honey, but that fool, Dave....

DAVE: I ain't mad neither.... Jim always tryin' to throw off on me.
But you can't joke him.

DAISY: (Soothingly) Aw, now, now!

JIM: You ain't jokin'. You means that, nigger. And if you tryin' to
get hot, first thing, you can pull of my blue shirt you put on this
morning.

DAVE: Youse a got that wrong. I ain't got on no shirt of yours.

JIM: Yes, you is got on my shirt, too. Don't tell me you ain't got on
my shirt.

DAVE: Well, even if I is, you can just lift your big plantations out
of my shoes. You can just foot it home barefooted.

JIM: You try to take any shoes offa me!

LIGE: (Pacifying them) Aw, there ain't no use of all that. What you
all want to start this quarreling for over a little jokin'.

JIM: Nobody's quarreling.... I'm just playin' a little for Daisy and
Dave's out there clownin' with her.

CLARK: (In doorway) I ain't gonna have no fussin' round my store, no
way. Shut up, you all.

JIM: Well, Mayor Clark, I ain't mad with him. We'se been friends all
our lives. He's slept in my bed and wore my clothes and et my grub....

DAVE: I et your grub? And many time as you done laid down with your
belly full of my grandma's collard greens. You done et my meat and
bread a whole lot more times than I et your stewed fish-heads.

JIM: I'd rather eat stewed fish-heads than steal out of other folkses
houses so much till you went to sleep on the roost and fell down one
night and broke up the settin' hen. (Loud laughter from the crowd)

DAVE: Youse a liar if you say I stole anybody's chickens. I didn't
have to. But you ... 'fore you started goin' around with me, playin'
that little box of yours, you was so hungry you had the white mouth.
If it wasn't for these white folks throwin' _me_ money for _my_
dancin', you would be thin as a whisper right now.

JIM: (Laughing sarcastically) Your dancin'! You been leapin' around
here like a tailless monkey in a wash pot for a long time and nobody
was payin' no 'tention to you, till I come along playing.

LINDSAY: Boys, boys, that ain't no way for friends to carry on.

DAISY: Well, if you all gonna keep up this quarrelin' and carryin' on
I'm goin' home. 'Bout time for me to be gittin' back to my white folks
anyhow. It's dark now. I'm goin', even if I have to go by myself. I
shouldn't a stopped by here nohow.

JIM: (Stopping his quarrel) You ain't gonna go home by yourself. I'm
goin' with you.

DAVE: (Singing softly)
  It may be so,
  I don't know.
  But it sounds to me
  Like a lie.

WALTER: Dave ain't' got as much rabbit blood as folks thought.

DAVE: Tell 'em 'bout me. (Turns to DAISY) Won't you choose a treat on
me, Miss Daisy, 'fore we go?

DAISY: (Coyly) Yessir, thank you. I wants a drink of soda water.

(DAVE pulls his hat down over his eyes, whirls around and offers his
arm to DAISY. They strut into the store, DAVE gazing contemptuously at
JIM as he passes. Crowd roars with laughter, much to the embarrassment
of JIM.)

LIGE: Ol' fast Dave jus' runnin' the hog right over you, Jim.

WALTER: Thought you was such a hot man.

LUM BOGER: Want me to go in there and put Daisy under arrest and bring
her to you?

JIM: (Sitting down on the edge of porch with one foot on the step and
lights a cigarette pretending not to be bothered.) Aw, I'll get her
when I want her. Let him treat her, but see who struts around that
lake and down the railroad with her by and by.

(DAVE and DAISY emerge from the store, each holding a bottle of red
soda pop and laughing together. As they start down the steps DAVE
accidentally steps on JIM's outstretched foot. JIM jumps up and pushes
DAVE back, causing him to spill the red soda all over his white shirt
front.)

JIM: Stay off my foot, you big ox.

DAVE: Well, you don't have to wet me all up, do you, and me in
company? Why don't you put your damn foot in your pocket?

DAISY: (Wiping DAVE'S shirt front with her handkerchief) Aw, ain't
that too bad.

JIM: (To DAVE) Well, who's shirt did I wet? It's mine, anyhow, ain't
it?

DAVE: (Belligerently) Well, if it's your shirt, then you come take it
off me. I'm tired of your lip.

JIM: Well, I will.

DAVE: Well, put your fist where you lip is. (Pushing DAISY aside.)

DAISY: (Frightened) I want to go home. Now, don't you all boys fight.

(JIM attempts to come up the steps. DAVE pushes him back and he
stumbles and falls in the dust. General excitement as the crowd senses
a fight.)

LITTLE BOY: (On the edge of crowd) Fight, fight, you're no kin. Kill
one another, won't be no sin. Fight, fight, you're no kin.

(JIM jumps up and rushes for DAVE as the latter starts down the steps.
DAVE meets him with his fist squarely in the face and causes him to
step backward, confused.)

DAISY: (Still on porch, half crying) Aw, my Lawd! I want to go home.

(General hubbub, women's cries of "Don't let 'em fight." "Why don't
somebody stop 'em?" "What kind of men is you all, sit there and let
them boys fight like that." Men's voices urging the fight: "Aw, let
'em fight." "Go for him, Dave." "Slug him, Jim."

JIM makes another rush toward the steps. He staggers DAVE. DAVE knocks
JIM sprawling once more. This time JIM grabs the mule bone as he
rises, rushes DAVE, strikes DAVE over the head with it and knocks him
out. DAVE falls prone on his back. There is great excitement.)

OLD WOMAN: (Screams) Lawdy, is he kilt? (Several men rush to the
fallen man.)

VOICE: Run down to the pump and get a dipper o' water.

CLARK: (To his wife in door) Mattie, come out of that store with a
bottle of witch hazely oil quick as you can. Jim Weston, I'm gonna
arrest you for this. You Lum Boger. Where is that marshall? Lum Boger!
(LUM BOGER detaches himself from the crowd.) Arrest Jim.

LUM: (Grabs JIM'S arm, relieves him of the mule bone and looks
helplessly at the Mayor.) Now I got him arrested, what's I going to do
with him?

CLARK: Lock him up back yonder in my barn till Monday when we'll have
the trial in de Baptist Church.

LINDSAY: Yeah, just like all the rest of them Methodists ... always
tryin' to take undercurrents on people.

WALTER: Ain't no worse then some of you Baptists, nohow. You all don't
run this town. We got jus' as much to say as you have.

CLARK: (Angrily to both men) Shut up! Done had enough arguing in front
of my place. (To LUM BOGER) Take that boy on and lock him up in my
barn. And save that mule bone for evidence.

(LUM BOGER leads JIM off toward the back of the store. A crowd follows
him. Other men and women are busy applying restoratives to DAVE. DAISY
stands alone, unnoticed in the center of the stage.)

DAISY: (Worriedly) Now, who's gonna take me home?


:::: CURTAIN::::




ACT TWO


SCENE I

SETTING: Village street scene; huge oak tree upstage center; a house
or two on back drop. When curtain goes up, Sister LUCY TAYLOR is seen
standing under the tree. She is painfully spelling it out.

(Enter SISTER THOMAS, a younger woman (In her thirties) at left.)

SISTER THOMAS: Evenin', Sis Taylor.

SISTER TAYLOR: Evenin'. (Returns to the notice)

SISTER THOMAS: Whut you doin'? Readin' dat notice Joe Clark put up
'bout de meeting? (Approaches tree)

SISTER TAYLOR: Is dat whut it says? I ain't much on readin' since I
had my teeth pulled out. You know if you pull out dem eye teeth you
ruins' yo' eye sight. (Turns back to notice) Whut it say?

SISTER THOMAS: (Reading notice) "The trial of Jim Weston for assault
and battery on Dave Carter wid a dangerous weapon will be held at
Macedonia Baptist Church on Monday, November 10, at three o'clock. All
are welcome. By order of J. Clark, Mayor of Eatonville, Florida."
(Turning to SISTER TAYLOR) Hit's makin' on to three now.

SISTER TAYLOR: You mean it's right _now_. (Looks up at sun to tell
time) Lemme go git ready to be at de trial 'cause I'm sho goin' to be
there an' I ain't goin' to bite my tongue neither.

SISTER THOMAS: I done went an' crapped a mess of collard greens for
supper. I better go put 'em on 'cause Lawd knows when we goin' to git
outa there an' my husband is one of them dat's gointer eat don't keer
whut happen. I bet if judgment day was to happen tomorrow he'd speck I
orter fix him a bucket to carry long. (She moves to exit, right)

SISTER TAYLOR: All men favors they guts, chile. But what you think of
all dis mess they got goin' on round here?

SISTER THOMAS: I just think it's a sin an' a shame befo' de livin'
justice de way dese Baptis' niggers is runnin' round here carryin' on.

SISTER TAYLOR: Oh, they been puttin' out the brags ever since Sat'day
night 'bout whut they gointer do to Jim. They thinks they runs this
town. They tell me Rev. CHILDERS preached a sermon on it yistiddy.

SISTER THOMAS: Lawd help us! He can't preach an' he look like 10 cents
worth of have-mercy let lone gittin' up dere tryin' to throw slams at
us. Now all Elder Simms done wuz to explain to us our rights ... whut
you think 'bout Joe Clarke runnin' round here takin' up for these ole
Baptist niggers?

SISTER TAYLOR: De puzzle-gut rascal ... we oughter have him up in
conference an' put him out de Methdis' faith. He don't b'long in
there--wanter tun dat boy outa town for nothin'.

SISTER THOMAS: But we all know how come he so hot to law Jim outa
town--hit's to dig de foundation out from under Elder Simms.

SISTER TAYLOR: Whut he wants do dat for?

SISTER THOMAS: 'Cause he wants to be a God-know-it-all an' a
God-do-it-all an' Simms is de onliest one in this town whut will buck
up to him.

(Enter SISTER JONES, walking leisurely)

SISTER JONES: Hello, Hoyt, hello, Lucy.

SISTER TAYLOR: Goin' to de meetin'?

SISTER JONES: Done got my clothes on de line an' I'm bound to be dere.

SISTER THOMAS: Gointer testify for Jim?

SISTER JONES: Naw, I reckon--don't make such difference to me which
way de drop fall.... 'Tain't neither one of 'em much good.

SISTER TAYLOR: I know it. I know it, Ida. But dat ain't de point. De
crow we wants to pick is: Is we gointer set still an' let dese Baptist
tell us when to plant an' when to pluck up?

SISTER JONES: Dat is something to think about when you come to think
'bout it. (Starts to move on) Guess I better go ahead--see y'all later
an tell you straighter.

(Enter ELDER SIMMS, right, walking fast, Bible under his arm, almost
collides with SISTER JONES as she exits.)

SIMMS: Oh, 'scuse me, Sister Jones. (She nods and smiles and exits.)
How you do, Sister Taylor, Sister Thomas.

BOTH: Good evenin', Elder.

SIMMS: Sho is a hot day.

SISTER TAYLOR: Yeah, de bear is walkin' de earth lak a natural man.

SISTER THOMAS: Reverend, look like you headed de wrong way. It's
almost time for de trial an' youse all de dependence we got.

SIMMS: I know it. I'm tryin' to find de marshall so we kin go after
Jim. I wants a chance to talk wid him a minute before court sets.

SISTER TAYLOR: Y'think he'll come clear?

SIMMS: (Proudly) I _know_ it! (Shakes the Bible) I'm goin' to law 'em
from Genesis to Revelation.

SISTER THOMAS: Give it to 'em, Elder. Wear 'em out!

SIMMS: We'se liable to havea new Mayor when all dis dust settle. Well,
I better scuffle on down de road. (Exits, left.)

SISTER THOMAS: Lord, lemme gwan home an' put dese greens on. (Looks
off stage left) Here come Mayor Clark now, wid his belly settin' out
in front of him like a cow catcher! His name oughter be Mayor Belly.

SISTER TAYLOR: (Arms akimbo) Jus' look at him! Tryin' to look like a
jigadier Breneral.

(Enter CLARK hot and perspiring. They look at him coldly.)

CLARK: I God, de bear got me! (Silence for a moment) How y'all
feelin', ladies?

SISTER TAYLOR: Brother Mayor, I ain't one of these folks dat bite my
tongue an' bust my gall--whut's inside got to come out! I can't see to
my rest why you cloakin' in wid dese Baptist buzzards 'ginst yo' own
church.

MAYOR CLARK: I ain't cloakin' in wid _none_. I'm de Mayor of dis whole
town I stands for de right an' ginst de wrong--I don't keer who it
kill or cure.

SISTER THOMAS: You think it's right to be runnin' dat boy off for
nothin'?

CLARK: I God! You call knockin' a man in de head wid a mule bone
nothin'? 'Nother thin; I done missed nine of my best-layin' hens. I
ain't sayin' Jim got 'em, but different people has tole me he burries
a powerful lot of feathers in his back yard. I God, I'm a ruint man!
(He starts towards the right exit, but LUM BOGER enters right.) I God,
Lum, I been lookin' for you all day. It's almost three o'clock. (Hands
him a key from his ring) Take dis key an' go fetch Jim Weston on to de
church.

LUM: Have you got yo' gavel from de lodge-room?

CLARK: I God, that's right, Lum. I'll go get it from de lodge room
whilst you go git de bone an' de prisoner. Hurry up! You walk like
dead lice droppin' off you. (He exits right while LUM crosses stage
towards left.)

SISTER TAYLOR: Lum, Elder Simms been huntin' you--he's gone on down
'bout de barn. (She gestures)

LUM BOGER: I reckon I'll overtake him. (Exit left.)

SISTER THOMAS: I better go put dese greens on. My husband will kill me
if he don't find no supper ready. Here come Mrs. Blunt. She oughter
feel like a penny's worth of have-mercy wid all dis stink behind her
daughter.

SISTER TAYLOR: Chile, some folks don't keer. They don't raise they
chillun; they drags 'em up. God knows if dat Daisy wuz mine, I'd throw
her down an' put a hundred lashes on her back wid a plow-line. Here
she come in de store Sat'day night (Acts coy and coquettish,
burlesques DAISY'S walk) a wringing and a twisting!

(Enter MRS. BLUNT, left.)

MRS. BLUNT: How y'all sisters?

SISTER THOMAS: Very well, Miz Blunt, how you?

MRS. BLUNT: Oh, so-so.

MRS. TAYLOR: I'm kickin', but not high.

MRS. BLUNT: Well, thank God you still on prayin' ground an' in a Bible
country. Me, I ain't so many today. De niggers got my Daisy's name all
mixed up in dis mess.

MRS. TAYLOR: You musn't mind dat, Sister Blunt. People jus' _will_
talk. They's talkin' in New York an' they's talkin' in Georgy an'
they's talkin' in Italy.

SISTER THOMAS: Chile, if you talk folkses talk, they'll have you in de
graveyard or in Chattahoochee one. You can't pay no 'tention to talk.

MRS. BLUNT: Well, I know one thing. De man or women, chick or child,
grizzly or gray, that tells me to my face anything wrong 'bout _my_
chile, I'm goin' to take _my_ fist (Rolls up right sleeve and gestures
with right fist) and knock they teeth down they throat. (She looks
ferocious) 'Case y'all know I raised my Daisy right round my feet till
I let her go up north last year wid them white folks. I'd ruther her
to be in de white folks' kitchen than walkin' de streets like some of
dese girls round here. If I do say so, I done raised a lady. She can't
help it if all dese mens get stuck on her.

MRS. TAYLOR: You'se tellin' de truth, Sister Blunt. That's whut I
always say: Don't confidence dese niggers. Do, they'll sho put you in
de street.

MRS. THOMAS: Naw indeed, never syndicate wid niggers. Do, they will
distriminate you. They'll be an _anybody_. You goin' to de trial,
ain't you?

MRS. BLUNT: Just as sho as you snore. An' they better leave Daisy's
name outa dis, too. I done told her and told her to come straight home
from her work. Naw, she had to stop by dat store and skin her gums
back wid dem trashy niggers. She better not leave them white folks
today to come traipsin' over here scornin' her name all up wid dis
nigger mess. Do, I'll kill her. No daughter of mine ain't goin' to do
as she please, long as she live under de sound of my voice. (She
crosses to right.)

MRS. THOMAS: That's right, Sister Blunt. I glory in yo' spunk. Lord, I
better go put on my supper.

(As MRS. BLUNT exits, right, REV. CHILDERS enters left with DAVE and
DEACON LINDSAY and SISTER LEWIS. Very hostile glances from SISTERS
THOMAS and TAYLOR toward the others.)

CHILDERS: Good evenin', folks.

(SISTERS THOMAS and TAYLOR just grunt. MRS. THOMAS moves a step or two
towards exit. Flirts her skirts and exits.)

LINDSAY: (Angrily) Whut's de matter, y'all? Cat got yo' tongue?

MRS. TAYLOR: More matter than you kin scatter all over Cincinnatti.

LINDSAY: Go 'head on, Lucy Taylor. Go 'head on. You know a very little
of yo' sugar sweetens my coffee. Go 'head on. Everytime you lift yo'
arm you smell like a nest of yellow hammers.

MRS. TAYLOR: Go 'head on yo'self. Yo' head look like it done wore out
three bodies. Talkin' 'bout _me_ smellin'--you smell lak a nest of
grand daddies yo'self.

LINDSAY: Aw rock on down de road, 'oman. Ah, don't wantuh change words
wid yuh. Youse too ugly.

MRS. TAYLOR: You ain't nobody's pretty baby, yo'self. You so ugly I
betcha yo' wife have to spread uh sheet over yo' head tuh let sleep
slip up on yuh.

LINDSAY: (Threatening) You better git way from me while you able. I
done tole you I don't wanter break a breath wid you. It's uh whole
heap better tuh walk off on yo' own legs than it is to be toted off.
I'm tired of yo' achin' round here. You fool wid me now an' I'll knock
you into doll rags, Tony or no Tony.

MRS. TAYLOR: (Jumping up in his face) Hit me? Hit me! I dare you tuh
hit me. If you take dat dare, you'll steal uh hawg an' eat his hair.

LINDSAY: Lemme gwan down to dat church befo' you make me stomp you.
(He exits, right.)

MRS. TAYLOR: You mean you'll _git_ stomped. Ah'm goin' to de trial,
too. De nex trial gointer be _me_ for kickin' some uh you Baptist
niggers around.

(A great noise is heard off stage left. The angry and jeering voices
of children. MRS. TAYLOR looks off left and takes a step or two
towards left exit as the noise comes nearer.)

VOICE OF ONE CHILD: Tell her! Tell her! Turn her up and smell her. Yo'
mama ain't got nothin' to do wid me.

MRS. TAYLOR: (Hollering off left) You lil Baptis' haitians leave them
chillun alone. If you don't, you better!

(Enter about ten children struggling and wrestling in a bunch. MRS.
TAYLOR looks about on the ground for a stick to strike the children
with.)

VOICE OF CHILD: Hey! Hey! He's skeered tuh knock it off. Coward!

MRS. TAYLOR: If y'all don't git on home!

SASSY LITTLE GIRL: (Standing akimbo) I know you better not touch me,
do my mama will 'tend to you.

MRS. TAYLOR: (Making as if to strike her.) Shet up you nasty lil
heifer, sassin' me! You ain't half raised.

(The little girl shakes herself at MRS. TAYLOR and is joined by two or
three others.)

MRS. TAYLOR: (Walkin' towards right exit.) I'm goin' on down to de
church an' tell yo' mammy. But she ain't been half raised herself.
(She exits right with several children making faces behind her.)

ONE BOY: (To sassy GIRL) Aw, haw! Y'all ol' Baptis' ain't got no
bookcase in yo' chuch. We went there one day an' I saw uh soda cracker
box settin' up in de corner so I set down on it. (Pointing at sassy
GIRL) Know what ole Mary Ella say? (Jeering laughter) Willie, you git
up off our library! Haw! Haw!

MARY ELLA: Y'all ole Meth'dis' ain't got no window panes in yo' ole
church.

ANOTHER GIRL: (Takes center of stand, hands akimbo and shakes her
hips) I don't keer whut y'all say, I'm a Meth'dis' bred an' uh
Meth'dis' born an' when I'm dead there'll be uh Meth'dis' gone.

MARY ELLA: (Snaps fingers under other girl's nose and starts singing.
Several join her.)
  Oh Baptis', Baptis' is my name
  My name's written on high
  I got my lick in de Baptis' church
  Gointer eat up de Meth'dis' pie.

(The Methodist children jeer and make faces. The Baptist camp make
faces back; for a full minute there is silence while each camp tries
to outdo the other in face making. The Baptist makes the last face.)

METHODIST BOY: Come on, less us don't notice 'em. Less gwan down to
de church an' hear de trial.

MARY ELLA: Y'all ain't de onliest ones kin go. We goin', too.

WILLIE: Aw, haw! Copy cats! (Makes face) Dat's right. Follow on behind
us lak uh puppy dog tail. (They start walking toward right exit,
switching their clothes behind.) Dat's right. Follow on behind us lak
uh puppy dog tail. (They start walking toward right exit, switching
their clothes behind.)

(Baptist children stage a rush and struggle to get in front of the
Methodists. They finally succeed in flinging some of the Methodist
children to the ground and some behind them and walk towards right
exit haughtily switching their clothes.)

WILLIE: (Whispers to his crowd) Less go round by Mosely's lot an' beat
'em there!

OTHERS: All right!

WILLIE: (Yellin' to Baptists) We wouldn't walk behind no ole Baptists!

(The Methodists turn and walk off towards left exit, switching their
clothes as the Baptists are doing.)


SLOW CURTAIN






End of Project Gutenberg's The Mule-Bone:, by Zora Hurston and Langston Hughes

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MULE-BONE: ***

***** This file should be named 19435.txt or 19435.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/4/3/19435/

Produced by Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by the
Library of Congress)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
