The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Man Who Fell Through the Earth, by
Carolyn Wells


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Man Who Fell Through the Earth


Author: Carolyn Wells



Release Date: February 13, 2014  [eBook #44872]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO FELL THROUGH THE
EARTH***


E-text prepared by Stephen Hutcheson, Mardi Desjardins, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images
generously made available by the Google Books Library Project
(http://books.google.com)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 44872-h.htm or 44872-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/44872/44872-h/44872-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/44872/44872-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      the Google Books Library Project. See
      http://books.google.com/books?id=idQcAAAAMAAJ





THE MAN WHO FELL THROUGH THE EARTH

by

CAROLYN WELLS

Author of "The Room With the Tassels," "Faulkner's Folly," etc.







New York
George H. Doran Company

Copyright, 1919,
By George H. Doran Company
Printed in the United States of America




    THIS BOOK IS DEDICATED
              TO
        BLANCHE CLARK
        APOSTLE OF THE
           FINE ART
              OF
          FRIENDSHIP




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                     PAGE
      I. Moving Shadow-Shapes                                   11
     II. Jenny's Version                                        27
    III. The Elevator                                           42
     IV. The Black Squall                                       58
      V. Olive Raynor                                           74
     VI. Clews                                                  90
    VII. Hudson's Errand                                       107
   VIII. The Man Who Fell Through The Earth                    122
     IX. The Man in Boston                                     138
      X. Penny Wise and Zizi                                   153
     XI. Case Rivers                                           169
    XII. The Link                                              185
   XIII. Olive's Adventure                                     203
    XIV. Where is Manning?                                     216
     XV. Wise's Pipe Dream                                     232
    XVI. The Snowflake                                         248
   XVII. Zizi's Hunch                                          264
  XVIII. Clear as Crystal                                      280




                            THE MAN WHO FELL
                              THROUGH THE
                                 EARTH




                               CHAPTER I
                          Moving Shadow-Shapes


One of the occasions when I experienced "that grand and glorious feeling"
was when my law business had achieved proportions that justified my
removal from my old office to new and more commodious quarters. I
selected a somewhat pretentious building on Madison Avenue between
Thirtieth and Fortieth Streets, and it was a red-letter day for me when I
moved into my pleasant rooms on its top floor.

The Puritan Trust Company occupied all of the ground floor and there were
also some of the private offices of that institution on the top floor, as
well as a few offices to be let.

My rooms were well located and delightfully light, and I furnished them
with care, selecting chairs and desks of a dignified type, and rugs of
appropriately quiet coloring. I also selected my stenographer with care,
and Norah MacCormack was a red-haired piece of perfection. If she had a
weakness, it was for reading detective stories, but I condoned that, for
in my hammocky moods I, too, dipped into the tangled-web school of
fiction.

And, without undue conceit, I felt that I could give most specimens of
the genus Sherlock cards and spades and beat them at their own game of
deduction. I practiced it on Norah sometimes. She would bring me a veil
or glove of some friend of hers, and I would try to deduce the friend's
traits of character. My successes and failures were about fifty-fifty,
but Norah thought I improved with practice, and, anyway, it exercised my
intelligence.

I had failed to pass examination for the army, because of a defect,
negligible, it seemed to me, in my eyesight. I was deeply disappointed,
but as the law of compensation is usually in force, I unexpectedly proved
to be of some use to my Government after all.


Across the hall from me was the private office of Amos Gately, the
President of the Puritan Trust Company, and a man of city-wide
reputation. I didn't know the great financier personally, but everyone
knew of him, and his name was a synonym for all that is sound, honorable,
and philanthropic in the money mart. He was of that frequently seen type,
with the silver gray hair that so becomingly accompanies deep-set dark
eyes.

And yet, I had never seen Mr. Gately himself. My knowledge of him was
gained from his frequent portraiture in the papers or in an occasional
magazine. And I had gathered, in a vague way, that he was a connoisseur
of the fine arts, and that his offices, as well as his home, were
palatial in their appointments.

I may as well admit, therefore, that going in and out of my own rooms I
often looked toward his door, in hopes that I might get a glimpse, at
least, of the treasures within. But so far I had not done so.

To be sure, I had only occupied my own suite about a week and then again
Mr. Gately was not always in his private offices during business hours.
Doubtless, much of the time he was down in the banking rooms.

There was a yellow-haired stenographer, who wore her hair in ear-muffs,
and who was, I should say, addicted to the vanity-case. This young
person, Norah had informed me, was Jenny Boyd.

And that sums up the whole of my intimate knowledge of Amos Gately--until
the day of the black snow squall!

I daresay my prehistoric ancestors were sun-worshipers. At any rate, I am
perfectly happy when the sun shines, and utterly miserable on a gloomy
day. Of course, after sunset, I don't care, but days when artificial
light must be used, I get fidgety and am positively unable to concentrate
on any important line of thought.

And so, when Norah snapped on her green-shaded desk light in
mid-afternoon, I impulsively jumped up to go home. I could stand
electrically lighted rooms better in my diggings than in the
work-compelling atmosphere of my office.

"Finish that bit of work," I told my competent assistant, "and then go
home yourself. I'm going now."

"But it's only three o'clock, Mr. Brice," and Norah's gray eyes looked up
from the clicking keys.

"I know it, but a snow storm is brewing,--and Lord knows there's snow
enough in town now!"

"There is so! I'm thinking they won't get the black mountains out of the
side streets before Fourth of July,--and the poor White Wings working
themselves to death!"

"Statistics haven't yet proved that cause of death prevalent among
snow-shovelers," I returned, "but I'm pretty sure there's more chance for
it coming to them!"

I hate snow. For the ocular defect that kept me out of the army is
corrected by not altogether unbecoming glasses, but when these are
moistened or misted by falling snow, I am greatly incommoded. So I
determined to reach home, if possible, before the squall which was so
indubitably imminent.

I snugged into my overcoat, and jammed my hat well down on my head, for
the wind was already blowing a gale.

"Get away soon, Norah," I said, as I opened the door into the hall, "and
if it proves a blizzard you needn't show up tomorrow."

"Oh, I'll be here, Mr. Brice," she returned, in her cheery way, and
resumed her clicking.


The offices of Mr. Gately, opposite mine, had three doors to the hall,
meaning, I assumed, three rooms in his suite.

My own door was exactly opposite the middle one of the three. On that was
the number two. To its left was number one, and to its right, number
three.

Each of these three doors had an upper panel of thick, clouded glass,
and, as the hall was not yet lighted and Mr. Gately's rooms were, I could
see quite plainly the shadows of two heads on the middle door,--the door
numbered two.

Perhaps I am unduly curious, perhaps it was merely a natural interest,
but I stood still a moment, outside my own door, and watched the two
shadowed heads.

The rippled clouding of the glass made their outlines somewhat vague, but
I could distinguish the fine, thick mane of Amos Gately, as I had so
often seen it pictured. The other was merely a human shadow with no
striking characteristics.

It was evident their interview was not amicable. I heard a loud,
explosive "No!" from one or other of them, and then both figures rose and
there was a hand-to-hand struggle. Their voices indicated a desperate
quarrel, though no words were distinguishable.

And then, as I looked, the shadows blurred into one
another,--swayed,--separated, and then a pistol shot rang out, followed
immediately by a woman's shrill scream.

Impulsively I sprang across the hall, and turned the knob of door number
two,--the one opposite my own door, and the one through which I had seen
the shadowed actions.

But the door would not open.

I hesitated only an instant and then hurried to the door next on the
right, number three.

This, too, was fastened on the inside, so I ran back to the only other
door, number one,--to the left of the middle door.

This door opened at my touch, and I found myself in the first of Amos
Gately's magnificent rooms.

Beyond one quick, admiring glance, I paid no attention to the beautiful
appointments, and I opened the communicating door into the next or middle
room.

This, like the first, contained no human being, but it was filled with
the smoke and the odor of a recently fired pistol.

I looked around, aghast. This was the room where the altercation had
taken place, where two men had grappled, where a pistol had been fired,
and moreover, where a woman had screamed. Where were these people?

In the next room, of course, I reasoned.

With eager curiosity, I went on into the third room. It was empty.

And that was all the rooms of the suite.

Where were the people I had seen and heard? That is, I had seen their
shadows on the glass door, and human shadows cannot appear without people
to cast them. Where were the men who had fought? Where was the woman who
had screamed? And who were they?


Dazed, I went back through the rooms. Their several uses were clear
enough. Number one was the entrance office. There was an attendant's
desk, a typewriter, reception chairs, and all the effects of the first
stage of an interview with the great man.

The second office, beyond a doubt, was Mr. Gately's sanctum. A stunning
mahogany table-desk was in the middle of the floor, and a large,
unusually fine swivel-chair stood behind it. On the desk, things were
somewhat disordered. The telephone was upset, the papers pushed into an
untidy heap, a pen-tray overturned, and a chair opposite the big desk
chair lay over on its side, as if Mr. Gately's visitor had risen
hurriedly. The last room, number three, was, clearly, the very holy of
holies. Surely, only the most important or most beloved guests were
received in here. It was furnished as richly as a royal salon, yet all in
most perfect taste and quiet harmony. The general coloring of draperies
and upholstery was soft blue, and splendid pictures hung on the wall.
Also, there was a huge war map of Europe, and indicative pins stuck in it
proved Mr. Gately's intense interest in the progress of events over
there.

But though tempted to feast my eyes on the art treasures all about, I
eagerly pursued my quest for the vanished human beings I sought.

There was no one in any of these three rooms, and I could see no exit,
save into the hall from which I had entered. I looked into three or four
cupboards, but they were full of books and papers, and no sign of a
hidden human being, alive or dead, could I find.

Perhaps the strangeness of it all blunted my efficiency. I had always
flattered myself that I was at my best in an emergency, but all previous
emergencies in which I had found myself were trivial and unimportant
compared with this.

I felt as if I had been at a moving picture show. I had seen, as on the
screen, a man shot, perhaps killed, and now all the actors had vanished
as completely as they do when the movie is over.

Then, for I am not entirely devoid of conscience, it occurred to me that
I had a duty,--that it was incumbent upon me to report to somebody. I
thought of the police, but was it right to call them when I had so vague
a report to make? What could I tell them? That I had seen shadows
fighting? Heard a woman scream? Smelled smoke? Heard the report of a
pistol? A whimsical thought came that the report of the pistol was the
only definite report I could swear to!

Yet the whole scene was definite enough to me.

I had seen two men fighting,--shadows, to be sure, but shadows of real
men. I had heard their voices raised in dissension of some sort, I had
seen a scuffle and had heard a shot, of which I had afterward smelled the
smoke, and,--most incriminating of all,--I had heard a woman's scream. A
scream, too, of terror, as for her life!

And then, I had immediately entered these rooms, and I had found them
empty of all human presence, but with the smoke still hanging low, to
prove my observations had been real, and no figment of my imagination.

I believed I had latent detective ability. Well, surely here was a chance
to exercise it!

What more bewildering mystery could be desired than to witness a
shooting, and, breaking in upon the scene, to find no victim, no
criminal, and no weapon!

I hunted for the pistol, but found no more trace of that than of the hand
that had fired it.

My brain felt queer; I said to myself, over and over, "a fight, a shot, a
scream! No victim, no criminal, no weapon!"

I looked out in the hall again. I had already looked out two or three
times, but I had seen no one. However, I didn't suppose the villain and
his victim had gone down by the elevator or by the stairway.

But where were they? And where was the woman who had screamed?

Perhaps it was she who had been shot. Why did I assume that Mr. Gately
was the victim? Could not he have been the criminal?

The thought of Amos Gately in the rôle of murderer was a little too
absurd! Still, the whole situation was absurd.

For me, Tom Brice, to be involved in this baffling mystery was the height
of all that was incredible!

And yet, was I involved? I had only to walk out and go home to be out of
it all. No one had seen me and no one could know I had been there.

And then something sinister overcame me. A kind of cold dread of the
whole affair; an uncanny feeling that I was drawn into a fearful web of
circumstances from which I could not honorably escape, if, indeed, I
could escape at all. The three Gately rooms, though lighted, felt dark
and eerie. I glanced out of a window. The sky was almost black and
scattering snowflakes were falling. I realized, too, that though the
place was lighted, the fixtures were those great alabaster bowls, and, as
they hung from the ceiling, they seemed to give out a ghostly radiance
that emphasized the strange silence.

For, in my increasingly nervous state, the silence was intensified and it
seemed the silence of death,--not the mere quiet of an empty room.

I pulled myself together, for I had not lost all sense of my duty. I
_must_ do something, I told myself, sternly,--but what?

My hand crept toward the telephone that lay, turned over on its side, on
Mr. Gately's desk.

But I drew back quickly, not so much because of a disinclination to touch
the thing that had perhaps figured in a tragedy but because of a dim
instinct of leaving everything untouched as a possible clew.

Clew! The very word helped restore my equilibrium. There had been a crime
of some sort,--at least, there had been a shooting, and I had been an
eye-witness, even if my eyes had seen only shadows.

My rôle, then, was an important one. My duty was to tell what I had seen
and render any assistance I could. But I wouldn't use that telephone. It
must be out of order, anyway, or the operator downstairs would be looking
after it. I would go back to my own office and call up somebody. As I
crossed the hall, I was still debating whether that somebody would better
be the police or the bank people downstairs. The latter, I decided, for
it was their place to look after their president, not mine.

I found Norah putting on her hat. The sight of her shrewd gray eyes and
intelligent face caused an outburst of confidence, and I told her the
whole story as fast as I could rattle it out.

"Oh, Mr. Brice," she exclaimed, her eyes wide with excitement, "let me go
over there! May I?"

"Wait a minute, Norah: I think I ought to speak to the bank people. I
think I'll telephone down and ask if Mr. Gately is down there. You know
it may not have been Mr. Gately at all, whose shadow I saw----"

"Ooh, yes, it was! You couldn't mistake his head, and, too, who else
would be in there? Please, Mr. Brice, wait just a minute before you
telephone,--let me take one look round,--you don't want to make a--to
look foolish, you know."

She had so nearly warned me against making a fool of myself, that I took
the hint, and I followed her across the hall.

She went in quickly at the door of room number one. One glance around it
and she said, "This is the first office, you see: callers come here, the
secretary or stenographer takes their names and all that, and shows them
into Mr. Gately's office."

As Norah spoke she went on to the second room. Oblivious to its grandeur
and luxury, she gave swift, darting glances here and there and said
positively: "Of course, it was Mr. Gately who was shot, and by a woman
too!"

"The woman who screamed?"

"No: more likely not. I expect the woman who screamed was his
stenographer. I know her,--at least, I've seen her. A little doll-faced
jig, who belongs about third from the end, in the chorus! Be sure she'd
scream at the pistol shot, but the lady who fired the shot wouldn't."

"But I saw the scrimmage and it was a man who shot."

"Are you sure? That thick, clouded glass blurs a shadow beyond
recognition."

"What makes you think it was a woman, then?"

"This," and Norah pointed to a hatpin that lay on the big desk.

It was a fine-looking pin, with a big head, but when I was about to pick
it up Norah dissuaded me.

"Don't touch it," she warned; "you know, Mr. Brice, we've really no right
here and we simply must not touch anything."

"But, Norah," I began, my common sense and good judgment having returned
to me with the advent of human companionship, "I don't want to do
anything wrong. If we've no right here, for Heaven's sake, let's get
out!"

"Yes, in a minute, but let me think what you ought to do. And, oh, do let
me take a minute to look round!"

"No, girl; this is no time to satisfy your curiosity or, to enjoy a sight
of these----"

"Oh, I don't mean that! But I want to see if there isn't some clew or
some bit of evidence to the whole thing. It is too weird! too impossible
that three people should have disappeared into nothingness! Where are
they?"

Norah looked in the same closets I had explored; she drew aside window
draperies and portières, she hastily glanced under desks and tables, not
so much, I felt sure, in expectation of finding anyone, as with a general
idea of searching the place thoroughly.

She scrutinized the desk fittings of the stenographer.

"Everything of the best," she commented, "but very little real work done
up here. I fancy these offices of Mr. Gately's are more for private
conferences and personal appointments than any real business matters."

"Which would account for the lady's hatpin," I observed.

"Yes; but how did they get out? You looked out in the hall, at once, you
say?"

"Yes; I came quickly through these three rooms, and then looked out into
the hall at once, and there was no elevator in sight nor could I see
anyone on the stairs."

"Well, there's not much to be seen here. I suppose you'd better call up
the bank people. Though if they thought there was anything queer they'd
be up here by this time."

I left Norah in Mr. Gately's rooms while I went back to my own office and
called up the Puritan Trust Company.

A polite voice assured me that they knew nothing of Mr. Gately's
whereabouts at that moment, but if I would leave a message he would
ultimately receive it.

So, then, I told them, in part, what had happened, or, rather, what I
believed had happened, and still a little unconcerned, the polite man
agreed to send somebody up.

"Stuffy people!" I said to Norah, as I returned to the room she was in.
"They seemed to think me officious."

"I feared they would, Mr. Brice, but you had to do it. There's no doubt
Mr. Gately left this room in mad haste. See, here's his personal
checkbook on his desk, and he drew a check today."

"Nothing remarkable in his drawing a check," I observed, "but decidedly
peculiar to leave his checkbook around so carelessly. As you say, Norah,
he left in a hurry."

"But how did he leave?"

"That's the mystery; and I, for one, give it up. I'm quite willing to
wait until some greater brain than mine works out the problem."

"But it's incomprehensible," Norah went on; "where's Jenny?"

"For that matter," I countered, "where's Mr. Gately? Where's his angry
visitor, male or female? and, finally, where's the pistol that made the
sound and smoke of which I had positive evidence?"

"We may find that," suggested Norah, hopefully.

But careful search failed to discover any firearms, as it had failed to
reveal the actors of the drama.

Nor did the representative from the bank come up at once. This seemed
queer, I thought, and with a sudden impulse to find out something, I
declared I was going down to the bank myself.

"Go on," said Norah, "I'll stay here, for I must know what they find out
when they do come."

I went out into the hall and pushed the "Down" button of the elevator.

"Be careful," Norah warned me, as the car was heard ascending, "say very
little, Mr. Brice, except to the proper authorities. This may be a
terrible thing, and you mustn't get mixed up in it until you know more
about it. You were not only the first to discover the disappearance,--but
you and I are apparently the only ones in this corridor who know of it
yet, we may be----"

"Suspected of the abduction of Amos Gately! Hardly! Don't let your
detective instinct run away with you Norah!"

And then the elevator door slid open and I got into the car.




                               CHAPTER II
                            Jenny's Version


The elevators in the building were run by girls, and the one I entered
was in charge of Minny Boyd, a sister of Jenny, who was in Mr. Gately's
office.

As soon as I stepped into the car I saw that Minny was in a state of
excitement.

"What's the matter?" I asked, sympathetically.

"Oh, Mr. Brice," and the girl burst into tears, "Jenny said----"

"Well," I urged, as she hesitated, "what did Jenny say?"

"Don't you know anything about it?"

"About what?" I asked, trying to be casual.

"Why, about Mr. Gately."

"And what about him?"

"He's gone! Disappeared!"

"Amos Gately? The president of the Puritan Trust Company! Minny, what do
you mean?"

"Why, Mr. Brice, only a little while ago, I took Jenny down. She was
crying like everything and she said that Mr. Gately had been shot!"

"Shot?"

"Yes, that's what she said----"

"Who shot him?"

"I don't know, but Jenny was nearly crazy! I told her to go to the
lunchroom,--that's where the girls go when off duty,--and I said I'd come
to her as soon as I could. I can't leave my car, you know."

"Of course not, Minny," I agreed; "but what did Jenny mean? Did she see
Mr. Gately shot?"

"No, I don't think so,--but she heard a pistol fired off, and
she--she----"

"What did she do?"

"She ran into Mr. Gately's private office,--and, he wasn't there! And
then she--oh, I suppose she hadn't any right to do it,--but she ran on to
his own personal room,--the one where she is never allowed to go,--and
there wasn't anybody there! So Jenny was scared out of her senses, and
she ran out here,--to the hall, I mean,--and I took her downstairs,--and
oh, Mr. Brice, I've got to stop at this floor,--there's a call,--and
please don't say anything about it,--I mean don't tell I said
anything--for Jenny told me not to----"

I saw Minny was in great perturbation, and I forebore to question her
further, for just then we stopped at the seventh floor and a man entered
the elevator.

I knew him,--that is, I knew he was George Rodman,--but I wasn't
sufficiently acquainted to speak to him.

So the three of us went on down in silence, past the other floors, and
reached the ground floor, where Rodman and I got out.

Waiting to go up, I found Mr. Pitt, a discount clerk of the Puritan Trust
Company.

"This is Mr. Brice?" he said, in a superior way.

I resented the superiority, but I admitted his soft impeachment.

"And you say there is something to be investigated in Mr. Gately's
offices?" he went on, as if I were a Food Administrator, or something.

"Well," I returned, a little curtly, "I chanced to see and hear and smell
a pistol shot,--and further looking into the matter failed to show
anybody killed or wounded or--in fact, failed to disclose anybody
whatever on the job, and I confess it all looks to me mighty queer!"

"And may I ask why it appeals to you as queer?"

I looked Friend Pitt square in the eye, and I said, "It seems to me queer
that a bank president should drop out of existence and even out of his
business affiliations in one minute without any recognition of the fact."

"Perhaps you overestimate an outside interest," said Pitt. "You must know
it is really none of the business of the Puritan Trust Company what Mr.
Gately does in his leisure hours."

"Very well, Mr. Pitt," I returned, "then let us go and interview the
young woman who is Mr. Gately's stenographer and who is even now in
hysterics in the employees' lunchroom."

Mr. Pitt seemed duly impressed and together we went to find Jenny.

The lunchroom for the employees of the building was a pleasant place, on
the ground floor, and therein we found Jenny, the yellow-haired
stenographer of Amos Gately.

The girl was, without doubt, hysterical, and her account of the shooting
was disjointed and incoherent.

Moreover, Mr. Pitt was of the supercilious type, the kind who never
believes anything, and his manner, as he listened to Jenny's story, was
incredulous and almost scoffing.

So Jenny's story, though to me illuminating, was, I felt sure, to Pitt,
of little value.

"Oh," Jenny exclaimed, "I was in my room, the first room, and I didn't
mean to listen,--I never do! and then, all of a sudden, I heard somebody
threatening Mr. Gately! That made me listen,--I don't care if it was
wrong--and then, I heard somebody quarreling with Mr. Gately."

"How do you know they were quarreling?" interposed Pitt's cold voice.

"I couldn't help knowing, sir. I heard Mr. Gately's usually pleasant
voice raised as if in anger, and I heard the visitor's voice, high and
angry too."

"You didn't know the visitor's voice? you had never heard it before?"
asked Pitt.

"No, sir; I've no idea who he could have been!" and the foolish little
Jenny bridled and looked like an innocent _ingénue_.

I broke in.

"But didn't you admit all visitors or callers to Mr. Gately?" I demanded.

Jenny looked at me. "No, sir," she replied; "I received all who came to
my door, but there were others!"

"Where did they enter?" asked Pitt.

"Oh, they came in at the other doors. You see, I only looked after my own
room. Of course, if Miss Raynor came,--or anybody that Mr. Gately knew
personally----" Jenny paused discreetly.

"And did Miss Raynor come this morning?" I asked.

"Yes," Jenny replied, "she did. That is, not this morning, but early this
afternoon. I know Miss Raynor very well."

Mr. Pitt seemed a little disturbed from his usual calm, and with evident
reluctance said to me, "I think, Mr. Brice, that this matter is more
serious than I thought. It seems to me that it would be wise to refer the
whole matter to Mr. Talcott, the secretary of the Trust Company."

Now, I was only too glad to refer the matter to anybody who could be
considered authoritative, and I agreed at once.

"Moreover," said Mr. Pitt, as he gave an anxious glance at Jenny, "I
think it well to take this young woman along, as she is the secretary of
Mr. Gately and may know----"

"Oh, no, sir," cried Jenny, "I don't know anything! Please don't ask me
questions!"

Jenny's perturbation seemed to make Mr. Pitt's intentions more definite,
and he corralled the young woman, as he also swept me along.

In a moment, we were all going into the offices of the Puritan Trust
Company.

And here, Mr. Pitt faded from view, and he left us in the august presence
of Mr. Talcott, the secretary of the Company.

I found myself in the quiet, pleasant atmosphere of the usual banker's
office, and Mr. Talcott, a kindly gentleman of middle-aged aristocracy,
began to question me.

"It seems to me, Mr. Brice," he began, "that this story of yours about
Mr. Gately is not only important but mysterious."

"I think so, Mr. Talcott," I responded, "and yet, the whole crux of the
matter is whether Mr. Gately is, at present, in some one of his offices,
or, perhaps at his home, or whether his whereabouts are undetermined."

"Of course, Mr. Brice," the secretary went on, "it is none of our
business where Mr. Gately is, outside of his banking hours; and yet, in
view of Mr. Pitt's report of your account, it is incumbent upon us, the
officers of the Trust Company, to look into the matter. Will you tell me,
please, all you know of the circumstances pertaining to Mr. Gately's
disappearance,--if he has disappeared?"

"If he has disappeared!" I snapped back; "and, pray, sir, if he has not
disappeared, where is he?"

Mr. Talcott, still unmoved, responded, "That is aside the question, for
the moment. What do you know of the matter, Mr. Brice?"

I replied by telling him all I knew of the whole affair, from the time I
first saw the shadows until the moment when I went down in the elevator
and met Mr. Pitt.

He listened with deepest attention, and then, seemingly unimpressed by my
story, began to question Jenny.

This volatile young lady had regained her mental balance, and was more
than ready to dilate upon her experiences.

"Yes, sir," she said, "I was sitting at my desk, and nobody had come in
for an hour or so, when, all of a sudden, I heard talking in Mr. Gately's
room."

"Do callers usually go through your room?" Mr. Talcott inquired.

"Yes, sir,--that is, unless they're Mr. Gately's personal friends,--like
Miss Raynor or somebody."

"Who is Miss Raynor?" I broke in.

"His ward," said Mr. Talcott, briefly. "Go on, Jenny; nobody had gone
through your room?"

"No, sir; and so, I was startled to hear somebody scrapping with Mr.
Gately."

"Scrapping?"

"Yes, sir; sort of quarreling, you know; I----"

"Did you listen?"

"Not exactly that, sir, but I couldn't help hearing the angry voices,
though I didn't make out the words."

"Be careful, Jenny," Talcott's tones were stern, "don't assume more than
you can be sure was meant."

"Then I can't assume anything," said Jenny, crisply, "for I didn't hear a
single word,--only I did feel sure the two of 'em was scrapping."

"You heard, then, angry voices?"

"Yes, sir, just that. And right straight afterward, a pistol shot."

"In Mr. Gately's room?"

"Yes, sir. And then I ran in there to see what it meant,----"

"Weren't you frightened?"

"No, sir; I didn't stop to think there was anything to be frightened of.
But when I got in there, and saw----"

"Well, go on,--what did you see?"

"A man, with a pistol in his hand, running out of the door----"

"Which door?"

"The door of number three,--that's Mr. Gately's own particular private
room,--well, he was running out of that door, with a pistol in his
hand,--and the pistol was smoking, sir!"

Jenny's foolish little face was red with excitement and her lips trembled
as she told her story. It was impossible to disbelieve her,--there could
be no doubt of her fidelity to detail.

But Talcott was imperturbable.

"The pistol was smoking," he repeated, "where did the man go with it?"

"I don't know, sir," said Jenny; "I ran out to the hall after him,--I
think I saw him run down the staircase, but I,--I was so scared with it
all, I jumped into the elevator,--Minny's elevator,--and came downstairs
myself."

"And then?" prompted Talcott.

"Then, sir,--oh, I don't know,--I think I lost my head--it was all so
queer, you know----"

"Yes, yes," said Talcott, soothingly,--he was a most courteous man, "yes,
Miss Jenny,--I don't wonder you were upset. Now, I think, if you will
accompany us, we will go upstairs to Mr. Gately's rooms."

It seemed to me that Mr. Talcott did not pay sufficient attention to my
presence, but I forgave this, because I felt sure he would be only too
glad to avail himself of my services later on. So I followed him and the
tow-headed Jenny up to the offices of the bank president.

We did not go up in Minny's elevator, but in another one, and our
appearance at the door of Mr. Gately's office number one, was met by
Norah,--my Norah, who received us with an air of grave importance.

She was unawed by the sight of Mr. Talcott, imposing though he was, and
was clearly scornful of Jenny, who had already assumed a jaunty manner.

But Jenny was quite self-possessed, and with a toss of her head at Norah
she started to explain.

"I was in here, at my desk, Mr. Talcott," she began, volubly; "and in Mr.
Gately's office, I heard somebody talking pretty sharp----"

"A man?"

"Yes, sir."

"How did he get in, if not through your room?"

"Oh, people often went through the hall doors of number two or three, and
sometimes they came through my room."

"Who went through your room this afternoon?"

"Only three people. An old man named Smith----"

"What was his business?"

"I'm not quite sure, but it had to do with his getting a part salary from
Mr. Gately; he was a down-and-outer, and he hoped Mr. Gately would help
him through."

"And did he?"

"Oh, yes, sir! Mr. Gately always was soft-hearted and never turned down
anybody in need."

"And the other callers?"

"There was an old lady, to see about her husband's pension,--and----"

"Well? I suppose not all the callers were beneficiaries?"

"No, sir. One was a--a lady."

"A lady? Describe her."

"Why, she was Miss Olive Raynor,--Mr. Gately's ward."

"Oh, Miss Raynor. Well, there's no use discussing her. Were there any
other ladies?"

"No, sir."

"Nor any other men?"

"No, sir; that is, not through my room. You know, people could go in to
Mr. Gately's private offices without going through my room."

"Yes, I know. But couldn't you see them?"

"Only dimly,--through the clouded glass window between my room and Mr.
Gately's."

"And what did you see of the callers in Mr. Gately's room just before you
heard the shot fired?"

Jenny looked dubious. She seemed inclined not to tell all she knew. But
Mr. Talcott spoke sharply.

"Come," he said; "speak up. Tell all you know."

"I didn't hear anybody come in," said Jenny, slowly; "and then, all of a
sudden, I heard loud voices,--and then, I heard quarrelly words----"

"Quarrelly?"

"Yes, sir, as if somebody was threatening Mr. Gately. I didn't hear
clearly, but I heard enough to make me look through the window between
the two rooms----"

"This window?"

"Yes, sir," and Jenny nodded at the clouded glass pane between her room
and Mr. Gately's office. "And I saw sort of shadows,--and then in a
minute I saw the shadows get up--you know, Mr. Gately and another
man,--and then,--I heard a pistol fired off, and I yelled!"

"It was your scream I heard, then!" I exclaimed.

"I don't know," Jenny replied, "but I did scream, because I am fearfully
scared of pistol shots, and I didn't know who was shooting."

"What did you do next?" asked Mr. Talcott, in his quiet way.

"I ran into Mr. Gately's room----"

"And you weren't frightened?"

"Not for myself. I was frightened of the shot,--I always am afraid of
firearms, but I wanted to know what was doing. So, I opened the door and
ran in----"

"Yes; and?"

"I saw nobody in Mr. Gately's room,--I mean this room next to mine,--so I
ran on, to the third room,--I am not supposed to go in there,--but I did,
and there I saw a man just going out to the hall and in his hand was a
smoking revolver."

"Out to the hall? Did you follow him?"

"Of course I did! But he ran down the staircase. I didn't go down that
way, because I thought I'd get down quicker and head him off by going
down in the elevator."

"So you went down in the elevator?"

"Yes, sir. It was Minny's elevator,--Minny's my sister,--and after I got
in,--and saw Minny, I got sort of hysterical and nervous, and I couldn't
remember what I was about."

"What became of the man?" asked Talcott, uninterested in Jenny's nerves.

"I don't know, sir. I was so rattled,--and I only saw him a
moment,--and----"

"Would you know him if you saw him again?"

"I don't know,--I don't think so."

"I wish you could say yes,--it may be of gravest importance."

But Jenny seemed to resent Mr. Talcott's desire.

"I don't see how you could expect it, sir," she said, pettishly; "I saw
him only in a glimpse,--I was scared to death at the sound of the pistol
shot,--and when I burst into this room and found Mr. Gately gone I was so
kerflummixed I didn't know what I was about! That I didn't!"

"And yet," Norah remarked, quietly, "after you went downstairs and these
gentlemen found you in the lunchroom, you were perfectly calm and
collected----"

"Nothing of the sort!" blazed back Jenny; "I'm all on edge! My nerves are
completely unstrung!"

"Quite so," said Mr. Talcott, kindly, "and I suggest that you go back to
the lunchroom, Miss Jenny, and rest and calm yourself. But please remain
there, until I call for you again."

Jenny looked a little disappointed at being thus thrust out of the
limelight, but as Mr. Talcott held the door open for her, she had no
choice but to depart, and we presently heard her go down in her sister's
elevator.

"Now," Mr. Talcott resumed, "we will look into this matter further.

"You see," he proceeded, speaking, to my surprise, as much to Norah as to
myself, "I can't really apprehend that anything serious has happened to
Mr. Gately. For, if the shot which Jenny heard, and which you, Mr. Brice,
heard,--had killed Mr. Gately, the body, of course, would be here. Again,
if the shot had wounded him seriously, he would in some way contrive to
make his condition known. Therefore, I feel sure that Mr. Gately is
either absolutely all right, or, if slightly wounded, he is in some
anteroom or in some friend's room nearby. And, if this is the case,--I
mean, if our Mr. Gately is ill or hurt, we must find him. Therefore,
careful search must be made."

"But," spoke up Norah, "perhaps Mr. Gately went home. There is no
positive assurance that he did not."

Mr. Talcott looked at Norah keenly. He didn't seem to regard her as an
impertinent young person, but he took her suggestion seriously.

"That may be," he agreed. "I think I will call up his residence."

He did so, and I gathered from the remarks he made on the telephone that
Amos Gately was not at his home, nor was his niece, Miss Olive Raynor,
there.

Talcott made another call or two, and I finally learned that he had
located Miss Raynor.

For, "Very well," he said; "I shall hope to see you here in ten or
fifteen minutes, then."

He hung up the receiver,--he had used the instrument in Jenny's room, and
not the upset one on Mr. Gately's desk,--and he vouchsafed:

"I think it is all right. Miss Raynor says she saw her uncle here this
afternoon, shortly after luncheon, and he said he was about to leave the
office for the day. She thinks he is at his club or on the way home.
However, she is coming around here, as she is in the limousine, and
fearing a storm, she wants to take Mr. Gately home."




                              CHAPTER III
                              The Elevator


Mr. Talcott returned to the middle room and looked more carefully at the
disturbed condition of things around and on Mr. Gately's desk.

"It is certain that Mr. Gately left the room in haste," he said, "for
here is what is undoubtedly a private and personal checkbook left open. I
shall take on myself the responsibility of putting it away, for the
moment, at least."

Mr. Talcott closed the checkbook and put it in a small drawer of the
desk.

"Why don't you put away that hatpin, too?" suggested Norah, eying the pin
curiously. "I don't think it belongs to Miss Raynor."

"Take it up by the edge," I warned; "I may be jumping to conclusions, but
there is a possibility that a crime has been committed, and we must
preserve what _may_ be evidence."

"Quite right, Mr. Brice," agreed Talcott, and he gingerly picked up the
pin by taking the edges of its ornate head between his thumb and
forefinger. The head was an Egyptian scarab,--whether a real one or not I
couldn't tell,--and was set on a flat backing of gold. This back might
easily retain the thumb print of the woman who had drawn that pin from
her hat in Mr. Gately's office. And who, Norah surmised, was the person
who had fired the pistol that I had heard discharged.

Placing the hatpin in the drawer with the checkbook, Mr. Talcott locked
the drawer and slipped the key in his pocket.

I wondered if he had seen some entry in the book that made him wish to
hide Mr. Gately's private affairs from curious eyes.

"There is indeed a possibility of something wrong," he went on, "at first
I couldn't think it, but seeing this room, that overturned chair and
upset telephone, in connection with the shooting, as you heard it, Mr.
Brice, it certainly seems ominous. And most mysterious! Two people
quarreling, a shot fired by one or other of them, and no sign of the
assailant, his victim, or his weapon! Now, there are three propositions,
one of which _must_ be the truth. Mr. Gately is alive and well, he is
wounded, or he is killed. The last seems impossible, as his body could
not have been taken away without discovery; if he were wounded, I think
that, too, would have to be known; so, I still feel that things are all
right. But until we can prove that, we must continue our search."

"Yes," I agreed, "search for Mr. Gately and also, search for the man who
was here and who quarreled with him."

"Or the woman," insisted Norah.

"I can't think it was a woman," I said. "Although the shadow was
indistinct, it struck me as that of a man, the motions and attitudes were
masculine, as I recall them. The hatpin may have been left here this
morning or any time."

"The visitor must be found," declared Mr. Talcott, "but I don't know how
to go about it."

"Ask the elevator girls," I suggested; "one of them must have brought the
caller up here."

We did this, but the attendants of the three elevators all denied having
brought anyone up to Mr. Gately's offices since the old man and the
elderly lady who had been mentioned by Jenny.

Miss Raynor had been brought up by one of the girls also, but we couldn't
quite ascertain whether she had come before or after the other two.

While waiting for Miss Raynor to come again, I tried to do a little
scientific deduction from any evidence I might notice.

But I gained small information. The desk-blotter, inkwell, and pens were
in immaculate order, doubtless they were renewed every day by a careful
attendant. All the minor accessories, such as paperweights and letter
openers were of individual styles and of valuable materials.

There was elaborate smoking paraphernalia and a beautiful single rose in
a tall silver vase.

"Can you read anything bearing on the mystery, Mr. Brice," asked Talcott,
noting my thoughtful scrutiny.

"No; nothing definite. In fact, nothing of any importance. I see that on
one occasion, at least, Mr. Gately kept a chauffeur waiting an
unconscionably long time, and the man was finally obliged to go away
without him."

"Well, now, how do you guess that?" and Mr. Talcott looked decidedly
interested.

"Like most of those spectacular deductions," I responded, "the
explanation takes all the charm out of it. There is a carriage check on
the desk,--one of those queer cards with a lot of circular holes in it.
That must have been given to Mr. Gately when he left his car, or perhaps
a taxicab, outside of some hotel or shop. As he didn't give it up, the
chauffeur must have waited for him until he was tired."

"He may have gone off with some friend, and sent word to the man not to
wait," offered Talcott.

"But then he would have sent the call-check out to identify him. What a
queer-looking thing it is," and I picked up the card, with its seven
round holes in a cabalistic array.

"Perhaps the caller left it," spoke up Norah; "perhaps he, or she, came
here in a cab, or a car, and----"

"No, Norah," I said, "such checks are not given out at a building of this
sort. Only at hotels, theaters, or shops."

"It's of no importance," and Mr. Talcott gave a slight shrug of
impatience; "the thing is, where is Mr. Gately?"

Restless and unable to sit still, I wandered into the third room. I had
heard of this sanctum, but I had never expected to see inside of it. The
impulse came to me now to make the most of this chance, for when Mr.
Gately returned I might be summarily, if courteously, ejected.

The effect of the room was that of dignified splendor. It had evidently
been done but not overdone by a decorator who was a true artist. The
predominant color was a soft, deep blue, and the rugs and textile fabrics
were rich and luxurious. There were a few fine paintings in gold frames
and the large war map occupied the greater part of a paneled wall space.
The chairs were spacious and cushioned, and a huge davenport stood in
front of a wide fireplace, where some logs were cheerily burning.

A cozy place to entertain friends, I ruminated, and then, turning back to
the middle room, I reconstructed the movements of the two people I had
seen shadowed.

"As they rose," I said to Mr. Talcott, "Amos Gately was behind this big
table-desk, and the other man,--for I still think it was a man,--was
opposite. The other man upset his chair, on rising, so he must have risen
hastily. Then the shot was fired, and the two disappeared. As Jenny came
into the room at once, and saw the strange man going through the third
room and on out to the stairs, we are forced to the conclusion that Mr.
Gately preceded him."

"Down the stairs?" asked Mr. Talcott.

"Yes, for the flight, at least, or Jenny would have seen him. Also, I
should have seen him, had he remained in this hall."

"And the woman?" asked Norah, "what became of her?"

"I don't think there was any woman present at that time," I returned.
"The hatpin was, doubtless, left by a woman caller, but we've no reason
to suppose she was there at the same time the shooting occurred."

"I can't think of any reason why anyone should shoot Mr. Gately," said
Talcott, musingly. "He is a most estimable gentleman, the soul of honor
and uprightness."

"Of course," I assented; "but has he no personal enemies?"

"None that I know of, and it is highly improbable, anyway. He is not a
politician, or, indeed, a public man of any sort. He is exceedingly
charitable, but he rarely makes known his good deeds. He has let it be
known that he wishes his benefactions kept quiet."

"What are his tastes?" I asked, casually.

"Simple in the extreme. He rarely takes a vacation, and though his home
is on a magnificent scale, he doesn't entertain very much. I have heard
that Miss Raynor pleads in vain for him to be more of a society man."

"She is his ward?"

"Yes; no relation, although she calls him uncle. I believe he was a
college chum of Miss Raynor's father, and when the girl was left alone in
the world, he took her to live with him, and took charge of her fortune."

"A large one?"

"Fairly so, I believe. Enough to tempt the fortune-hunters, anyway, and
Mr. Gately frowns on any young man who approaches him with a request for
Olive Raynor's hand."

"Perhaps the caller today was a suitor."

"Oh, I hardly think a man would come armed on such an errand. No; to me,
the most mysterious thing about it all, is why anyone should desire to
harm Mr. Gately. It must have been a homicidal maniac,--if there is
really such a being."

"The most mysterious part to me," I rejoined, "is how they both got away
so quickly. You see, I stood in my doorway opposite, looking at them, and
then as soon as I heard the shot I ran to the middle door as fast as I
could, then to the third room door, and then back to the first. Of
course, had I known which room was which, I should have gone to door
number one first. But, as you see, I was in the hall, going from one door
to another, and I must have seen the men if they came out into the hall
from any door."

"They left room number three, as you entered number one," said Norah,
carefully thinking it out.

"That must be so, but where did they go? Why, if Mr. Gately went
downstairs, has he not been visible since? I can't help feeling that Amos
Gately is unable to move, for some reason or other. May he have been
kidnaped? Or is he bound and gagged in some unused room, say on the floor
below this?"

"No," said Talcott, briefly. "Without saying anything about it I put one
of the bank clerks on the hunt and I told him to look into every room in
the building. As he has not reported, he hasn't yet found Mr. Gately."

And then, Olive Raynor arrived.

I shall never forget that first sight of her. Heralded by a fragrant
whiff of fresh violets, she came into the first room, and paused at the
doorway of the middle room, where we still sat.

Framed in the mahogany door-casing, the lovely bit of femininity seemed a
laughing bundle of furs, velvets, and laces.

"What's the matter?" said a soft, sweet voice. "Has Uncle Amos run away?
I hope he is in a sheltered place for there's a ferocious storm coming up
and the wind is blowing a gale."

The nodding plumes on her hat tossed as she raised her head inquiringly
and looked about.

"What do I smell?" she exclaimed; "it's like--like pistol-smoke!"

"It is," Mr. Talcott said. "But there's no pistol here now----"

"How exciting! What's it all about? Do tell me."

Clearly the girl apprehended no serious matter. Her wide-open eyes showed
curiosity and interest, but no thought of trouble had as yet come to her.

She stepped further into the room, and throwing back her furs revealed a
slender graceful figure, quick of movement and of exquisite poise.
Neither dark nor very fair, her wavy brown hair framed a face whose chief
characteristic seemed to be its quickly changing expressions. Now
smiling, then grave, now wondering, then merry, she looked from one to
another of us, her big brown eyes coming to rest at last on Norah.

"Who are you?" she asked, with a lovely smile that robbed the words of
all curtness.

"I am Norah MacCormack, Miss Raynor," my stenographer replied. "I am in
Mr. Brice's office, across the hall. This is Mr. Brice."

There was no reason why Norah should be the one to introduce me, but we
were all a little rattled, and Mr. Talcott, who, of course, was the one
to handle the situation, seemed utterly at a loss as to how to begin.

"How do you do, Mr. Brice?" and Miss Raynor flashed me a special smile.
"And now, Mr. Talcott, tell me what's the matter? I see something has
happened. What is it?"

She was grave enough now. She had suddenly realized that there was
something to tell, and she meant to have it told.

"I don't know, Miss Raynor," Talcott began, "whether anything has
happened, or not. I mean, anything serious. We--that is,--we don't know
where Mr. Gately is."

"Go on. That of itself doesn't explain your anxious faces."

So Talcott told her,--told her just what we knew ourselves, which was so
little and yet so mysterious.

Olive listened, her great, dark eyes widening with wonder. She had thrown
off her fur coat and was seated in Amos Gately's desk-chair, her dainty
foot turning the chair on its swivel now and then.

Her muff fell to the floor, and, unconsciously, she drew off her gloves
and dropped them upon it. She said no word during the recital, but her
vivid face showed all the surprise and fear she felt as the tale was
told.

Then, "I don't understand," she said, simply. "Do you think somebody shot
Uncle Amos? Then where is he?"

"We don't understand, either," returned Talcott. "We don't know that
anybody shot him. We only know a shot was fired and Mr. Gately is
missing."

Just then a man entered Jenny's room, from the hall. He, too, paused in
the doorway to the middle room.

"Oh, Amory, come in!" cried Miss Raynor. "I'm so glad you're here. This
is Mr. Brice,--and Miss MacCormack,--Mr. Manning. Mr. Talcott, of course
you know."

I had never met Amory Manning before, but one glance was enough to show
how matters stood between him and Olive Raynor. They were more than
friends,--that much was certain.

"I saw Mr. Manning downstairs," Miss Raynor said to Talcott, with a
lovely flush, "and--as Uncle Amos doesn't--well, he isn't just crazy over
him, I asked him not to come up here with me, but to wait for me
downstairs."

"And as you were so long about coming down, I came up," said Mr. Manning,
with a little smile. "What's this,--what about a shot? Where's Mr.
Gately?"

Talcott hesitated, but Olive Raynor poured out the whole story at once.

Manning listened gravely, and at the end, said simply: "He _must_ be
found. How shall we set about it?"

"That's what I don't know," replied Talcott.

"I'll help," said Olive, briskly. "I refuse to believe any harm has come
to him. Let's call up his clubs."

"I've done that," said Talcott. "I can't think he went away
anywhere--willingly."

"How, then?" cried Olive. "Oh, wait a minute,--I know something!"

"What?" asked Talcott and I together, for the girl's face glowed with her
sudden happy thought.

"Why, Uncle Amos has a private elevator of his own. He went down in
that!"

"Where is it?" asked Manning.

"I don't know," and Olive looked about the room. "And Uncle forbade me
ever to mention it,--but this is an emergency, isn't it? and I'm
justified,--don't you think?"

"Yes," said Manning; "tell all you know."

"But that's all I do know. There is a secret elevator that nobody knows
about. Surely you can find it."

"Surely we can!" said I, and jumping up, I began the search.

Nor did it take long. There were not very many places where a private
entrance could be concealed, and I found it behind the big war map, in
the third room.

The door was flush with the wall, and painted the same as the panel
itself. The map simply hung on the door, but overlapped sufficiently to
hide it. Thus the door was concealed, though not really difficult of
discovery.

"It won't open," I announced after a futile trial.

"Automatic," said Talcott. "You can't open that kind, when the car is
down."

"How do you know the car is down?" I asked.

"Because the door won't open. Well, it does seem probable that Mr. Gately
went away by this exit, then."

"And the woman, too," remarked Norah.

As before Mr. Talcott didn't object to Norah's participation in our
discussion, in fact, he seemed rather to welcome it, and in a way,
deferred to her opinions.

"Perhaps so," he assented. "Now, Miss Raynor, where does this elevator
descend to? I mean, where does it open on the ground floor?"

"I don't know, I'm sure," and the girl looked perplexed. "I've never been
up or down in it. I shouldn't have known of it, but once Uncle let slip a
chance reference to it, and when I asked him about it, he told me, but
told me not to tell. You see, he uses it to get away from bores or people
he doesn't want to see."

"It ought to be easy to trace its shaft down through the floors," said
Amory Manning. "Though I suppose there's no opening on any floor until
the street floor is reached."

Manning was a thoughtful-looking chap. Though we had never met before, I
knew of him and I had an impression that he was a civil engineer or
something like that. I felt drawn to him at once, for he had a pleasant,
responsive manner and a nice, kindly way with him.

In appearance, he was scholarly, rather than business-like. This effect
was probably due in part to the huge shell-rimmed glasses he wore. I
can't bear those things myself, but some men seem to take to them
naturally. For the rest, Manning had thick, dark hair, and he was a bit
inclined to stoutness, but his goodly height saved him from looking
stocky.

"Well, I think we ought to investigate this elevator," said Talcott.
"Suppose you and I, Mr. Brice, go downstairs to see about it, leaving
Miss Raynor and Mr. Manning here,--in case,--in case Mr. Gately returns."

I knew that Talcott meant, in case we should find anything wrong in the
elevator, but he put it the more casual way, and Miss Raynor seemed
satisfied.

"Yes, do," she said, "and we'll wait here till you come back. Of course,
you can find where it lands, and--oh, wait a minute! Maybe it opens in
the next door building. I remember, sometimes when I've been waiting in
the car for Uncle, he has come out of the building next door instead of
this one, and when I asked him why, he always turned the subject without
telling me."

"It may be," and Talcott considered the position of the shaft. "Well,
we'll see."

Norah discreetly returned to my offices, but I felt pretty sure she
wouldn't go home, until something was found out concerning the mysterious
disappearance.

On the street floor we could find no possible outlet for the elevator in
question, and had it not been for Olive's hint as to where to look, I
don't know how we should have found it at all.

But on leaving the Trust Company Building, we found the place at last. At
least, we found a door which was in the position where we supposed the
elevator shaft would require it, and we tried to open it.

This we failed to do.

"Looks bad," said Talcott, shaking his head. "If Amos Gately is in there,
it's because he's unable to get out--or--unconscious."

He couldn't bring himself to speak the crueler word that was in both our
minds, and he turned abruptly aside, as he went in search of the janitor
or the superintendent of the building.

Left by myself I stared at the silent door. It was an ordinary-looking
door, at the end of a small side passage which communicated with the main
hall or lobby of the building. It was inconspicuous, and as the passage
had an angle in it, Amos Gately could easily have gone in and out of that
door without exciting comment.

Of course, the janitor would know all about it; and he did.

He returned with Mr. Talcott, muttering as he came.

"I always said Mr. Gately'd get caught in that thing yet! I don't hold
with them automaticky things, so I don't. They may go all right for years
and then cut up some trick on you. If that man's caught in there, he must
be pretty sick by this time!"

"Does Mr. Gately use the thing much?" I asked.

"Not so very often, sir. Irregular like. Now, quite frequent, and then,
again, sort of seldom. Well, we can't open it, Mr. Talcott. These things
won't work, only just so. After anybody gets in, and shuts the door, it
can't be opened except by pressing a button on the inside. Can't you get
in upstairs?"

"No," said Talcott, shortly. "Get help, then, and break the door down."

This was done, the splintered door fell away, and there, in a crumpled
heap on the floor of the car, was Amos Gately,--dead.




                               CHAPTER IV
                            The Black Squall


If I had thought Mr. Talcott somewhat indifferent before, I changed my
opinion suddenly. His face turned a ghastly white and his eyes stared
with horror. There was more than his grief for a friend, though that was
evident enough, but his thoughts ran ahead to the larger issues involved
by this murder of a bank president and otherwise influential financier.

For murder it was, beyond all doubt. The briefest examination showed Mr.
Gately had been shot through the heart, and the absence of any weapon
precluded the idea of suicide.

The janitor, overcome at the sight, was in a state bordering on collapse,
and Mr. Talcott was not much more composed.

"Mr. Brice," he said, his face working convulsively, "this is a fearful
calamity! What can it mean? Who could have done it? What shall we do?"

Answering his last question first, I endeavored to take hold of the
situation.

"First of all, Mr. Talcott, we must keep this thing quiet for the moment.
I mean, we must not let a crowd gather here, before the necessary matters
are attended to. This passage must be guarded from intrusion, and the
bank people must be notified at once. Suppose you and the janitor stay
here, while I go back next door and tell--tell whom?"

"Let me think," groaned Mr. Talcott, passing his hand across his
forehead. "Yes, please, Mr. Brice, do that--go to the bank and tell Mr.
Mason, the vice-president--ask him to come here to me,--then, there is
Miss Raynor--oh, how horrible it all is!"

"Also, we must call a doctor," I suggested, "and, eventually, the
police."

"Must they be brought in? Yes, I suppose so. Well, Mr. Brice, if you will
attend to those errands, I will stay here. But we must shut up that
janitor!"

The man, on the verge of collapse, was groaning and mumbling prayers, or
something, as he rocked his big body back and forth.

"See here, my man," I said, "this is a great emergency and you must meet
it and do your duty. That, at present, is to stay here with Mr. Talcott,
and make sure that no one else comes into this small hall until some of
Mr. Gately's bank officers arrive. Also, cease that noise you're making,
and see what you can do in the way of being a real help to us."

This appeal to his sense of duty was not without effect, and he
straightened up and seemed equal to the occasion.

I ran off, then, and out of one big building back into the other. The
storm, still brewing, had not yet broken, but the sky was black, and a
feeling of more snow was in the atmosphere. I shivered as I felt the
bitterly cold outside air, and hurried into the bank building.

I had no trouble in reaching Mr. Mason, for the bank itself was closed
and many of the employees had gone home. My manner of grave importance
sufficed to let me pass any inquisitive attendants and I found Mr. Mason
in his office.

I told him the bare facts in a few words, for this was no time to
tarry,--I wanted to get up and tell Miss Raynor before any less
considerate messenger might reach her.

Mr. Mason was aghast at the terrible tidings, and closing his desk at
once, he quickly reached for his hat and coat and started on his fearsome
errand.

"I will call Mr. Gately's physician," he said, his mind working quickly,
as he paused a moment, "and you will break the news to Miss Raynor, you
say? I can't seem to comprehend it all! But my place is by Mr. Gately and
I will go there at once."

So I hastened up to the twelfth floor again, trying, on the way, to think
how I should best tell the awful story.

The elevator ride had never seemed so short,--the floors fairly flew past
me, and in a few moments I was in the beautiful third room of Mr.
Gately's, and found Miss Raynor and Mr. Manning eagerly awaiting my news.

"Have you found Mr. Gately?" Amory Manning asked, but at the same
instant, Olive Raynor cried out, "You have something dreadful to tell us,
Mr. Brice! I know you have!"

This seemed to help me, and I answered, "Yes, Miss Raynor,--the worst."

For I felt that this imperious, self-possessed girl would rather be told
abruptly, like that, than to have me mince matters.

And I was right, for she said, quickly, "Tell it all,--any knowledge is
better than suspense."

So I told her, as gently as I could, of our discovery of the body of Amos
Gately in his private elevator, at the bottom of the shaft.

"But I don't understand," said Manning. "Shot through the heart and alone
in the elevator?"

"That's the way it is. I've no idea of the details of the matter. We
didn't move the body, or examine it thoroughly, but the first glance
showed the truth. However, a doctor has been sent for, and the
vice-president and secretary of the Trust Company have things in charge,
so I came right up here to tell you people about it."

"And I thank you, Mr. Brice," Olive's lovely dark eyes gave me a grateful
glance. "What shall I do, Amory? Shall we go down there?"

Manning hesitated. "I will," he said, looking at her tenderly, "but--do
you want to? It will be hard for you----"

"I know,--but I must go. If Uncle Amos has been killed--surely I ought to
be there to--to--oh, I don't know what!"

Olive Raynor turned a piteous face to Manning, and he took her hand in
his as he responded: "Come, if you think best, dear. Shall we go
together?"

"Yes," she said; "I dread it, but I must go. And if you are with me I can
stand it. What are you going to do, Mr. Brice?"

"I was about to go home," I replied, "but I think I will go back to the
Matteawan Building, for I may be able to give assistance in some way."

I went across to my office and found that Norah had gone home. Snapping
on some lights, I sat down for a few minutes to straighten out my
bewildered, galloping thoughts.

Here was I, Tom Brice, a quiet, inconspicuous lawyer, thrown suddenly
into the very thick of a most mysterious murder case. I well knew that my
evidence concerning the shadows I had seen would be eagerly listened to
by the police, when the time came, and I wondered how soon that would be.
I wanted to go home. I wanted to avoid the coming storm and get into my
cozy rooms, and think the thing over. For, I had always felt that I had
detective ability, and now I had been given a wonderful chance to prove
it. I did not intend to usurp anybody's prerogative nor did I desire to
intrude. If I were not asked to assist, I should not offer; but I had a
vague hope that my early acquaintance with the vital facts would make me
of value as a witness and my mental acumen would bring forth some
original ideas in the way of investigation.

And I wanted some time to myself, to cogitate, and to formulate some
theories already budding in my brain. Now if the police were already on
the scene next door, they would not let me get away, if I appeared.

And yet, I longed for further news of the proceedings. So, I concluded to
look in at the Matteawan, and if that led me into the clutches of the
police inquisitors, I must submit. But, if I could get away before their
arrival, I should do so. I was quite willing to be called upon by them,
and to tell all I knew, but I wanted to postpone that until the next day,
if possible.

Not wishing to obtrude my presence further on Miss Raynor, I went down in
an elevator without returning to the Gately rooms. Indeed, I didn't know
whether she had gone down yet or not.

But she had, and when I reached the scene, both she and Manning were
there and were consulting with the men from the bank as to what should be
done.

The doctor came, too, and began to examine the body.

The rest of us stood huddled in the narrow hall, now grown hot and close,
but we dared not open the door to the main lobby, lest outsiders should
make their way in.

I asked the janitor if there were not some room that could be used as a
waiting place, but even as he answered me, the doctor made his report.

It was to the effect that Amos Gately had been shot before he entered the
elevator or immediately upon his entrance. That he had died instantly,
and, therefore it would seem that the body must have been placed in the
car and sent down by the assailant. But this was only conjecture; all the
doctor could assert was that Mr. Gately had been dead for perhaps an
hour, and that the position of the body on the floor indicated an
instantaneous death from a shot through the heart.

And then the janitor bestirred himself, and said he could give us the use
of a vacant office on the ground floor, and we went in there,--all except
the doctor, who remained by the elevator.

Mr. Mason and Mr. Talcott agreed that the police must be notified and
they declared their willingness to stay for their arrival. But the
vice-president told Miss Raynor she could go home if she preferred to.

"I'll wait a while," she said, with the quick decision that I found was
habitual with her, "the car is still here,--oh, ought we not to tell
Connor? He's our chauffeur."

"I'll tell him," volunteered Manning. "I have to go now, I've an
important matter to attend to before six o'clock. Olive, may I come up to
the house this evening?"

"Oh, do," she answered, "I'll be so glad to have you. Come early, won't
you?"

"Yes," said Manning, and after pausing for some further talk with the
doctor he went away.

I tarried, wondering if I might go also, or if I were needed there.

But as Mason and Talcott were deeply engrossed in a low-toned
conversation and as Miss Raynor was waiting an opportunity to confer with
the doctor, who was their family physician, I concluded I might as well
go home while I was free to do so.

So without definite adieux, but with a word to Miss Raynor that she might
command my services at any time, I started for home.

The long expected storm had begun, and enormous snowflakes were falling
thickly.

As I left the Matteawan, I discerned Amory Manning talking to the
chauffeur of a big limousine and knew that he was telling Amos Gately's
man what had happened to his master.

I slowed up, hoping Manning would get through the interview and walk
along, and I would join him.

When he left the chauffeur, however, he darted across the street, and
though I followed quickly, I almost lost sight of him in the blinding
snowfall.

I called out to him, but he didn't hear, and small wonder, for the wind
roared and the traffic noises were deafening.

So I hurried after him, still hoping to overtake him.

And I did, or, at least, when he finally boarded a Southbound car on
Third Avenue, I hopped on the same car.

I had intended taking a Madison Avenue car, but there was none in sight,
and I felt pretty sure there was a blockade on the line. The streets
showed snowpiles, black and crusted, and the street cleaners were few and
far apart.

The car Manning and I managed to get onto was crowded to the doors. We
both stood, and there were just too many people between us to make
conversation possible, but I nodded across and between the bobbing heads
and faces, and Manning returned my greeting.

Stopping occasionally to let off some struggling, weary standees and to
take on some new snow-besprinkled stampeders, we at last reached
Twenty-second Street, and here Manning nodded a farewell to me, as he
prepared to leave by the front end of the car.

This was only three blocks from my own destination, and I determined to
get off, too, still anxious to speak to him regarding the scene of
tragedy we had just left.

So I swung off the rear end of the car, and it moved on through the
storm.

I looked about for Manning, but as I stepped to the ground a gust of wind
gave me all I could do to preserve my footing. Moreover, it sent a flurry
of snowflakes against my glasses, which rendered them almost opaque.

I dashed them clear with my gloved hand, and looked for my man, but he
was nowhere to be seen from where I stood in the center of the four
street corners.

Where could Manning have disappeared to? He must have flown like the
wind, if he had already darted either up or down Third Avenue or along
Twenty-second Street in either direction.

However, those were the only directions he could have taken, and I
concluded that as I struggled to raise my umbrella and was at the same
time partially blinded by my snowed-under glasses, he had hurried away
out of sight. Of course, he had no reason to think I was trying to catch
up with him, indeed, he probably did not know that I also left the car,
so he had no need for apology.

And yet, I couldn't see how he had disappeared with such magical
celerity. I asked a street cleaner if he had seen him.

"Naw," he said, blowing on his cold fingers, "naw, didn't see nobody.
Can't see nothin' in this here black squall!"

And that's just what it was. A sudden fierce whirlwind, a maelstrom of
tossing flakes, and a black lowering darkness that seemed to envelop
everything.

"Mad Mary," the great clock nearby, boomed out five solemn notes that
somehow added to the weirdness of the moment, and I grasped my umbrella
handle, pushed my glasses more firmly into place, and strode toward my
home.

With some, home is where the heart is, but, as I was still heart-whole
and fancy-free, I had no romantic interest to build a home around, and my
home was merely two cozy, comfy rooms in the vicinity of Gramercy Park.

And at last I reached them, storm-tossed, weary, cold, and hungry, all of
which unpleasant conditions were changed for the better as rapidly as I
could accomplish it.

And when, finally, I found myself seated, with a lighted cigar, at my own
cheery reading table, I congratulated myself that I had come home instead
of remaining at the Matteawan Building.

For, I ruminated, if the police had corralled me as witness, and held me
for one of their protracted queryings, I might have stayed there until
late into the night or even all night. And the storm, still howling
outside my windows, made me glad of warmth and shelter.

Then, too, I was eager to get my thoughts in order. I am of a methodical
mentality, and I wanted to set down in order the events I had experienced
and draw logical and pertinent deductions therefrom.

I greatly wished I had had a few moments' chat with Amory Manning. I
wanted to ask him some questions concerning Amos Gately that I didn't
like to ask of the bank men. Although I knew Gately's name stood for all
that was honorable and impeccable in the business world, I had not
forgotten the hatpin on his desk, nor the queer smile on Jenny's face as
she spoke of his personal callers.

I am not one to harbor premature or unfounded suspicions of my fellow
creatures, but

  "_A little nonsense, now and then,_
  _Is relished by the best of men,_"

And Amos Gately may not have been above enjoying some relaxations that he
felt no reason to parade.

But this was speculation, pure and simple, and until I could ask somebody
concerning Mr. Gately's private life, I had no right to surmise anything
about it.

Carefully, I went over all I knew about the tragedy from the moment when
I had opened my outer office door ready to start for home. Had I left a
few moments sooner, I should probably never have known anything much of
the matter except what I might learn from the newspapers or from the
reports current among the tenants of the Puritan Building.

As it was, and from the facts as I marshaled them in order before my
mind, I believed I had seen shadowed forth the actual murder of Amos
Gately. A strange thing, to be an eye-witness, and yet to witness only
the shadows of the actors in the scene!

I strove to remember definitely the type of man who did the shooting.
That is, I supposed he did the shooting. As I ruminated, I realized I had
no real knowledge of this. I saw the shadowed men rise, clinch, struggle,
and disappear. Yes, I was positive they disappeared from my vision before
I heard the shot. This argued, then, that they wrestled,--though I
couldn't say which was attacker and which attacked,--then they rushed to
the next room, where the elevator was concealed by the big map; and then,
in that room, the shot was fired that ended Amos Gately's life.

This must be the truth, for I heard only one shot, and it must have been
the fatal one.

Then, I could only think that the murderer had deliberately,--no, not
deliberately, but with exceeding haste,--had put his victim in the
elevator and sent the inert body downstairs alone.

This proved the full knowledge of the secret elevator on the part of the
assassin, so he must have been a frequenter of Mr. Gately's rooms, or, at
least had been there before, and was sufficiently intimate to know of the
private exit.

To learn the man's identity then, one must look among Mr. Gately's
personal friends,--or, rather, enemies.

I began to feel I was greatly handicapped by my utter ignorance of the
bank president's social or home life. But it might be that in the near
future I should again see Miss Raynor, and perhaps in her home, where I
could learn something of her late uncle's habits.

But, returning to matters I did know about, I tried hard to think what
course of procedure the murderer probably adopted after his crime.

And the conclusion I reached was all too clear. He had, of course, gone
down the stairs, as Jenny had said, for at least a few flights.

Then, I visualized him, regaining his composure, assuming a nonchalant,
business-like air, and stopping an elevator on a lower floor, where he
stepped in, without notice from the elevator girl or the other
passengers.

Just as Rodman had entered from a middle floor, when I was descending
with Minny.

Perhaps Rodman was the murderer! I knew him slightly and liked him not at
all. I had no earthly reason to suspect him,--only,--he had got on, I
remembered, at the seventh floor, and his office was on the tenth. This
didn't seem terribly incriminating, I had to admit, but I made a note of
it, and determined to look Mr. Rodman up.

My telephone bell rang, and with a passing wonder at being called up in
such a storm, I responded.

To my delight, it proved to be Miss Raynor speaking.

"Forgive me for intruding, Mr. Brice," she said, in that musical voice of
hers, "but I--I am so lonesome,--and there isn't anyone I want to talk
to."

"Talk to me, then, Miss Raynor," I said, gladly. "Can I be of any service
to you--in any way?"

"Oh, I think so. I want to see you tomorrow. Can you come to see me?"

"Yes, indeed. At what time?"

"Come up in the morning,--that is, if it's perfectly convenient for you."

"Certainly; in the morning, then. About ten?"

"Yes, please. They--they brought Uncle home."

"Did they? I'm glad that was allowed. Are you alone?"

"Yes; and I'm frightfully lonely and desolate. It's such a terrible night
I wouldn't ask any of my friends to come to stay with me."

"You expected Mr. Manning to call, I thought."

"I did; but he hasn't come. Of course, the reason is that it isn't a fit
night for anyone to go out. I telephoned his rooms, but he wasn't in. So
I don't know what to think. I'd suppose he'd telephone even if he
couldn't get here."

"Traffic must be pretty nearly impossible," I said, "it was awful going
when I reached home soon after five, and now, there's a young blizzard
raging."

"Yes, I couldn't expect him; and perhaps the telephone wires are
affected."

"This one isn't, at any rate, so chat with me as long as you will. You
can get some friend to come to stay with you tomorrow, can't you?"

"Oh, yes; I could have got somebody tonight, but I hadn't the heart to
ask it. I'm all right, Mr. Brice, I'm not a very nervous person,--only,
it is sort of awful. Our housekeeper is a nice old thing, but she's
nearly in hysterics and I sent her to bed. I'll say good-by now, and I'll
be glad to see you tomorrow."




                               CHAPTER V
                              Olive Raynor


I did see Miss Olive Raynor the next day, but not in the surroundings of
her own home as I had expected.

For I received a rather peremptory summons to present myself at police
headquarters at a shockingly early hour, and not long after my arrival
there, Miss Raynor appeared also.

The police had spent a busy night, and had unearthed more or less
evidence and had collected quite a cloud of witnesses.

Chief of Police Martin conducted the inquiry, and I soon found that my
story was considered of utmost importance, and that I was expected to
relate it to the minutest details.

This I did, patiently answering repeated questions and asseverating
facts.

But I could give no hint as to the identity, or even as to the appearance
of the man who quarreled with Mr. Gately. I could, and did say that he
seemed to be a burly figure, or, at least, the shadow showed a large
frame and broad shoulders.

"Had he a hat on?" asked the Chief.

"No; and I should say he had either a large head or thick, bushy hair,
for the shadow showed that much."

"Did you not see his face in profile?"

"If so, it was only momentarily, and the clouded glass of the door, in
irregular waves, entirely prevented a clear-cut profile view."

"And after the two men rose, they disappeared at once?"

"They wrestled;--it seemed, I should say, that Mr. Gately was grabbed by
the other man, and tried to make a getaway, whereupon the other man shot
him."

"Are you quite sure, Mr. Brice," and the Chief fixed me with his sharp
blue eye, "that you are not reconstructing this affair in the light of
the later discovery of Mr. Gately's fate?"

I thought this over carefully before replying, and then said: "It's quite
possible I may have unconsciously done so. But I distinctly saw the two
figures come together in a desperate struggle, then disappear, doubtless
into the third room, and then I heard the shot. That is all I can state
positively."

"You, then, went right across the hall and tried to enter?"

"Yes; tried to enter at the middle door, where I had seen the men."

"And next?"

"Finding that door fastened, I tried the third, because the men had
seemed to disappear in that direction."

"The third room was also locked?"

"Yes; or at least the door would not open from the outside. Then I went
back to the door number one."

"And that opened at once?"

"Yes; had I tried that first, I should probably have seen the men,--or
the girl, Jenny."

"Perhaps. Could you recognize the head of the visitor if you should see
it again shadowed on the door?"

"I am not sure, but I doubt if I could. I could tell if it were a very
different type of head, but if merely similar, I could not swear it was
the same man."

"H'm. We must make the experiment. At least it may give us a hint in the
right direction."

He questioned me further as to my knowledge of Mr. Gately and his
affairs, but when he found I knew almost nothing of those and had been a
tenant of the Puritan Building but a very short time he suddenly lost
interest in me and turned his attention to Miss Raynor.

Olive Raynor had come alone and unattended. This surprised me, for I had
imagined the young ladies of the higher social circles never went
anywhere alone. But in many ways Miss Raynor evinced her independence and
self-reliance, and I had no doubt a trusted chauffeur waited in her car
outside.

She was garbed in black, but it was not the heavy crape material that I
supposed all women wore as mourning. A long black velvet cape swathed the
slender figure in its voluminous folds, and as this was thrown back, I
saw her gown was of black satin, with thinner black material used in
combination. Women's clothes, though a mystery to me, had a sort of
fascination for my ignorant eyes, and I knew enough to appreciate that
Miss Raynor's costume was correct and very smart.

Her hat was black, too, smaller than the one I saw her in the day before,
and of a quieter type.

Altogether, she looked very lovely, and her sweet, flower-like face, with
its big, pathetic brown eyes, was raised frankly to Chief Martin as she
answered his questions in a low, clear voice. A slight pallor told of a
night of wakefulness and sorrow, but this seemed to accentuate the
scarlet of her fine, delicate lips,--a scarlet unacquainted with the
assistance of the rouge stick.

"No," she said, positively, "Mr. Gately had no enemies, I am sure he
hadn't! Of course, he may have kept parts of his life or his affairs
secret from me, but I have lived with him too long and too familiarly not
to know him thoroughly. He was of a simple, straightforward nature, and a
wise and noble gentleman."

"Yet you were not entirely fond of your uncle," insinuated the Chief.

"He was not my uncle," returned Olive, calmly. "I called him that but he
was no relation to me. He used to be a college chum of my father's and
when both my parents died, he became not only my guardian but my kind
friend and benefactor. He took me to live with him, and I have been his
constant companion for twelve years. During that time, I have seen no
act, have heard no word that could in the slightest way reflect on his
honor or his character as a business man or as a gentleman."

The girl spoke proudly, as though glad to pay this tribute to her
guardian, but still, there was no note of affection in her voice,--no
quiver of sorrow at her loss.

"Yet you are not bowed with grief at his death," observed Martin.

The dainty chin tilted in indignation. "Mr. Martin," Olive said, "I
cannot believe that my personal feelings are of interest to you. I
understand I am here to be questioned as to my knowledge of facts bearing
on this case."

The Chief nodded his head. "That's all right," he said, "but I must learn
all I can of Mr. Gately's life outside his bank as well as in it. If you
won't give me information I must get it elsewhere."

The implied threat worked.

"I do indeed sorrow at Mr. Gately's tragic fate," Olive said, gently. "To
be sure, he was not my kin, but I admired and deeply respected him. If I
did not deeply love him it was his own fault. He was most strict and
tyrannical in his household, and his lightest word was law. I was willing
enough to obey in many matters, but it annoyed and irritated me when he
interfered with my simplest occupations or pleasures. He permitted me
very little company or amusement; he forbade many of my friends the
house; and he persistently refused to let me accept attentions from men,
unless they were certain ones whom he preferred, and--whom I did not
always favor."

"Did he favor Amory Manning?" was the next abrupt question.

Olive's cheeks turned a soft pink, but she replied calmly. "Not
especially, though he had not forbidden Mr. Manning the house. Why do you
ask that?"

"Had you noticed anything unusual lately about Mr. Gately? Any
nervousness or apprehension of danger?"

"Not in the least. He was of a most equable temperament, and there has
been no change of late."

"When did you last see him--alive?"

"Yesterday afternoon. I went to his office to get some money."

"He has charge of your fortune?"

"Yes."

"He made no objection to your expenditures?"

"Not at all. He was most just and considerate in my financial affairs. He
gave me then what I asked for, and after a very short stay I went on."

"Where?"

"To the house of a friend on Park Avenue, where I spent most of the
afternoon."

"At what time were you in Mr. Gately's office?"

"I don't know exactly. About two o'clock, I think."

"Can't you tell me more positively? It may be important."

But Olive couldn't be sure whether she was there before or after two. She
had lunched late, and had done some errands, and had finally reached her
friend's home by mid-afternoon.

This seemed to me most plausible, for society young ladies do not always
keep strict note of time, but the Chief apparently thought it a matter of
moment and made notes concerning it.

Olive looked indifferent, and though she was courteous enough, her whole
manner betokened a desire to get the examination over and to be allowed
to go home.

After a little further tedious questioning, which, so far as I could see,
elicited nothing of real importance, the Chief sighed and terminated the
interview.

Mr. Mason and Mr. Talcott had by this time arrived, and their presence
was welcomed by Miss Raynor, who was apparently glad of the nearness of a
personal friend.

Of course, their evidence was but a repetition of the scenes I had been
through the day before, but I was deeply interested in the attitudes of
the two men.

Talcott, the secretary of the Trust Company, was honestly affected by the
death of his friend and president, and showed real sorrow, while Mr.
Mason, the vice-president, was of a cold, precise demeanor, seemingly far
more interested in discovering the murderer than appalled by the tragedy.

"We _must_ learn who killed him," Mr. Mason reiterated. "Why, Chief
Martin, if the police fail to track down the slayer of Amos Gately, it
will be a blot on their record forever! Spare no effort,--put your best
men on the case, move heaven and earth, if need be, but get your man! The
Company will back you to the full extent of its power; we will offer a
reward, when the suitable time comes for that. But the crime must be
avenged, the man that shot President Gately _must_ pay the penalty!"

Olive's flashing eyes showed her sympathy with this sort of talk and I
could quite understand the attitude of the girl, whose sense of justice
cried out for revenge, while she was forced to admit the deprivations of
her life with her guardian.

Somewhat later, the three went away together, Miss Raynor and the men
from the bank, but I remained, hoping to learn more from further
witnesses. And I did. I learned so much that my thoughts and theories
were started off along totally different lines; my half-formed beliefs
were knocked down and set up again, with swift continuance.

First, Jenny Boyd, the yellow ear-muffed stenographer came in, wearing
her Sunday clothes. Her cheaply fashionable hat was tilted over her pert
little face, which showed enthusiastic, if ill-advised application of
certain pigments. Her gown was V-necked and short-skirted, but it had a
slight claim to style and was undeniably becoming. Her air of importance
was such that I thought I had never seen such an enormous amount of ego
contained in such a small cosmos.

Minny was with her, but the older sister, in quieter attire, was merely a
foil for the ebullient Jenny. Also, they were accompanied by a big,
good-natured faced man, whom I recognized at once as the janitor of the
Matteawan Building, and who, it transpired, was the father of the two
girls.

"Here we are," he said, in a bluff, hearty way; "here's me and my girls,
and we'd be obliged, Mr. Chief, if you'd cut it short as much as you can,
for me and Minny wants to get back."

"All right, Boyd," and Chief Martin smiled at him. "I'll tackle you
first. Tell us all about that private elevator of Mr. Gately's."

"I will, but savin' for this murder business, not a word of it would ever
have crossed my lips. Well, Mr. Gately, he owned the Matteawan, d'you
see? and when it suited his purposes to put in a private elevator up to
his rooms on the top floor of the next door building,--The Puritan
Building, you know,--what more easy than to run the shaft up in the one
building with the opening at the top out into the other house. Anyways,
that's what he done,--a long time ago. I had to know of it, of
course,----"

"Of course, as superintendent of the Matteawan."

"That's what they call it now, but I like better to be called janitor. As
janitor I began, and as janitor I'll work to the end. Well, Mr. Gately,
he went up and down in the little car whenever he chose, and no one
noticed him at all. It wasn't, after all, to say, secret, exactly, but it
was a private elevator."

"But a concealed door in his own office makes the thing pretty secret, I
should say."

"Secret it is, then. But it's no crime for a man to have a concealed way
of gettin' into or out of his own rooms, is it? Many's the time Mr.
Gately's come down laughing fit to bust at the way he got away from some
old doddering fool who wanted to buzz him to death!"

"You frequently saw him come down, then?"

"Not to say frequently,--but now and again. If I happened to be about at
the time."

"Did anyone else use the elevator?"

"Sometimes, yes. I've seen a few people go up or come down,--but mostly
it was the boss himself."

"Did he go up in it yesterday?"

"Not that I seen. But, of course, he may have done so."

"When did he last come into his offices before--before he disappeared?"

"When did he, Jenny? Speak up, girl, and tell the Chief all you know
about it."

Although Martin had not addressed Jenny, he turned to her now as if
inviting her story.

And Jenny bridled, shook out her feather boa, made a futile attempt to
pull her brief skirt a trifle farther down toward a silk-stockinged
ankle, and began:

"Of course, when Mr. Gately went into his office he most gen'ally went in
the middle door, right into his pers'nal office. He didn't go through my
room. And, so, yest'day, he went in the middle door, but right away,
almost, he opened my door and stuck his head in, and says, 'Don't let
anybody in to see me this afternoon, unless you come and ask me first.'"

"Wasn't this a general rule?"

"'Most always; but sometimes somebody I'd know'd come, like Mr. Talcott
or Miss Olive, and they'd just nod or smile at me and walk right in at
Mr. Gately's door. So I says, 'Yes, sir,' and I looked sharp that nobody
rushed me. Mr. Gately, he trusted me, and I was careful to do just what
he said, always."

"Well, go on. Who called?"

"First, Mr. Smith; and then Mrs. Driggs; and after them, Miss Olive."

"Miss Raynor?"

"Yes, of course!" and Jenny spoke flippantly. "I even announced her,
'cause I had strick orders. Miss Olive, she just laughed and waited till
I come back and said she might go in."

"What time was this?"

"Couldn't say for sure. 'Long about two or three, I guess."

Jenny was assiduously chewing gum, and her manner was far from
deferential, which annoyed the Chief.

"Try to remember more nearly," he said, sharply. "Was Miss Raynor there
before or after the other two callers you mentioned?"

"Well, now, it's awful hard to tell that." Jenny cocked her head on one
side, and indulged in what she doubtless considered most fetching
eye-play. "I ain't a two-legged time-table!"

"Be careful," advised the Chief. "I want straight answers, not
foolishness, from you."

Jenny sulked. "I'm givin' it to you as straight's I can, Mr. Chief.
Honest to goodness, I don't know if Miss Olive was just before the Driggs
hen or after her!"

"Also, be more careful of your choice of words. Did Mrs. Driggs go back
through your room when she left?"

"Yes, I guess she did,--but,--lemmesee, no, I guess she didn't either."

"Isn't your memory very short?"

"For such trifles, yes, sir. But I can remember lots of things real easy.
I've got a date now, with----"

"Stop! If you don't look out, young woman, you'll be locked up!"

"Behave pretty, now, Jenny girl," urged her father, who was quite
evidently the slave of his resplendent offspring; "don't be flip; this
here's no place for such-like manners."

"You're right, it isn't," agreed the Chief, and he glared at Jenny, who
was utterly unmoved by his sternness.

"Well, ain't I behaving pretty?" and the silly thing giggled archly and
folded her hands with an air of mock meekness.

Continued harsh words from the Chief, however, made her at last tell a
straight and coherent story, but it threw no light on the mysterious
caller. In fact, Jenny knew nothing whatever of him, save that she saw or
thought she saw him run downstairs, with a pistol in his hand.

"What sort of hat did the man wear?" asked the Chief, to get some sort of
description.

"I don't know,--a soft hat, I guess."

"Not a Derby?"

"Oh, yes! I do believe it _was_ a Derby! And he had on an overcoat----"

"A dark one?"

"No,--sort of--oh, I guess it wasn't an overcoat,--but a, you know,
Norfolk jacket, like."

"A Norfolk, and no overcoat on a day like yesterday! I don't believe you
saw any man at all, Jenny!"

"Do you know, that's what I think sometimes, Mr. Chief! It almost seems's
if I dreamed it."

"What do you mean! Don't you dare guy me, miss!"

"I'm not," and Jenny's saucy face looked serious enough now. "But it was
all so fearful sudden, and I was so struck all of a heap, that I just
can't say what was so and what wasn't!"

"That does seem to be your difficulty. You sit over there and think the
matter over, while I talk to your sister."

Minny, a quiet, pretty girl, was as reticent as Jenny was voluble. But
after all, she had little to tell. She had brought no one up in her
elevator to see Mr. Gately beside Miss Raynor that she knew of except the
man named Smith and Mrs. Driggs.

"Did these people all go down in your car, too?"

"I'm not sure. The cars were fairly crowded, and I know Miss Raynor did
not, but I'm not so sure about the others."

Well, Minny's evidence amounted to nothing, either, for though she told
of several strangers who got on or off her car at various floors, she
knew nothing about them, and they could not be traced.

The three Boyds were quizzed a little more and then old Joe Boyd, the
father, and Minny were allowed to go back to their respective posts, but
the Chief held Jenny for further grilling. He had a hope, I felt sure,
that he could get from her some hint of Mr. Gately's personal affairs. He
had heard of the hatpin, and though he hadn't yet mentioned it
definitely, I knew he was satisfied it was not Miss Raynor's, and he
meant to put Jenny through a mild sort of third degree.

I was about to depart, for I knew I would not be invited to this session,
and, too, I could learn the result later.

Then an officer came in, and after a whispered word to Chief Martin they
beckoned to me.

"Do you know Amory Manning?" the Chief inquired.

"I met him yesterday for the first time," I replied, "but I have known of
him before."

"Where does he live?"

"Up around Gramercy Park somewhere, I think."

"That's right, he does. Well, the man is missing."

"Missing! Why, I saw him last night,--that is, yesterday afternoon, and
he was all right then."

"I've had men searching for him all the morning," the Chief went on, "and
he's nowhere to be found. He wasn't at his rooms at all last night."

I harked back. I had last seen Manning getting off the Third Avenue car
at Twenty-second Street,--just where he would naturally get off to go to
his home.

I told this, and concluded, "he must have changed his mind, then, and
gone somewhere else than to his rooms."

"Yes, it looks that way," agreed the Chief. "But where did he go? That's
the question. He can't be found."




                               CHAPTER VI
                                 Clews


I didn't reach my office until afternoon, and there I found Norah, in a
brown study.

She looked up with a smile as I came in.

"I'm neglecting my work," she said, with a glance at a pile of papers,
"but that affair across the hall has taken hold of me and I can't put it
out of my mind."

"Nor can I. I feel as if I were deeply involved in it,--if not indeed, an
accessory! But there are new developments. Mr. Manning is missing."

"Mr. Manning? What has he got to do with it?"

"With the crime? Nothing. He didn't come up here until Miss Raynor came,
you know. But----"

"Are they engaged?"

"Not that I know of. I think not."

"Well, they will be, then. And don't worry about Mr. Manning's absence.
He'll not stay long away from Miss Raynor. Who is he, anyway? I mean what
does he do?"

"He's a civil engineer and he lives in Gramercy Park. That's the extent
of my knowledge of him. I've seen him down in the bank once or twice
since I've been here, and I like his looks. I hope, for Miss Raynor's
sake, he'll turn up soon. She expected him to call on her last evening
and he didn't go there at all."

"I shouldn't think he would! Why, it was a fearful night. I was going to
the movies, but I couldn't think of going out in that wild gale! But
never mind Mr. Manning now, let's talk about the Gately affair. I want to
go over there and look around the office. Do you suppose they'd let me?"

"Why, I expect so. Is anybody there now?"

"Yes, a police detective,--that man, Hudson. You know they call him Foxy
Jim Hudson, and I suppose he's finding out a lot of stuff that isn't so!"

"You haven't a very high opinion of our arms of the law."

"Oh, they're all right,--but most detectives can't see what's right under
their noses!"

"Not omniscient Sherlocks, are they? And you think you could do a lot of
smarty-cat deduction?"

Norah didn't resent my teasing, but her gray eyes were very earnest as
she said, "I wish I could try. A woman was in that room yesterday
afternoon; someone besides Miss Raynor and the old lady Driggs."

"How do you know?"

"Take me over there and I'll show you. They'll let me in, with you to
back me."

We went across and the officer made no objections to our entrance. In
fact, he seemed rather glad of someone to talk to.

"We're sorta up against it," he confessed. "Our suspicions are all
running in one direction, and we don't like it."

"You have a suspect, then?" I asked.

"Hardly that, but we begin to think we know which way to look."

"Any clews around, to verify your suspicions?"

"Lots of 'em. But take a squint yourself, Mr. Brice. You're
shrewd-witted, and--my old eyes ain't what they used to was."

I took this mock humility for what it was worth,--nothing at all,--and I
humored the foxy one by a properly flattering disclaimer.

But I availed myself of his permission and tacitly assuming that it
included Norah, we began a new scrutiny of the odds and ends on Mr.
Gately's desk, as well as other details about the rooms.

Norah opened the drawer that Mr. Talcott had locked,--the key was now in
it.

"Where's the checkbook?" she asked, casually.

Hudson looked grave. "Mr. Pond's got that," he said; "Mr. Pond's Mr.
Gately's lawyer, and he took all his accounts and such. But that
check-book's a clew. You see the last stub in it shows a check drawn to a
woman----"

"I said it was a woman!" exclaimed Norah.

"Well, maybe,--maybe. Anyhow the check was drawn _after_ the ones made
out to Smith and the Driggs woman. So, the payee of that last check was
in here later than the other two."

"Who was she?" was Norah's not unnatural inquiry.

But Hudson merely looked at her, with a slight smile that she should
expect an answer to that question.

"Oh, all right," she retorted; "I see her hatpin is still here."

"If that there hatpin is a clew, you're welcome to it. We don't think it
is. Mr. Gately had frequent lady callers, as any man's got a right to
have, but because they leaves their hatpins here, that don't make 'em
murderers. No, I argue that if a woman shot Mr. Gately she would be cute
enough _not_ to leave her hatpin by way of a visitin' card."

This raised Hudson's mentality in my opinion, and I could see it also
scored with Norah.

"That's true," she generously agreed. "In books, as soon as I come to the
dropped handkerchief or broken cuff-link, I know that _isn't_ the
property of the criminal. But, all the same, people do leave clews,--why,
Sherlock Holmes says a person can't enter and leave a room without his
presence there being discoverable."

"Poppycock," said Hudson, briefly, and resumed his cogitation.

He was sitting at ease in Mr. Gately's desk-chair, but I could see the
man was thinking deeply, and as he had material for thought that he
wasn't willing to share with us, I returned to my own searching.

"Here's something the lady left!" I exclaimed, as on a silver ash-tray I
saw a cigarette stub, whose partly burned gold monogram betokened it had
served a woman's use.

"Hey, let that alone!" warned Hudson. "And don't be too previous;
sometimes men have gilt-lettered cigs, don't they?"

Without reply, I scrutinized the monogram. But only a bit remained
unburnt, and I couldn't make out the letters.

Norah was digging in the waste basket, and, the scamp! when Hudson's head
was turned, she surreptitiously fished out something which she hid in her
hand, and later transferred to her pocket.

"Nothing doing!" scoffed Hudson, as he turned and saw her occupation, "we
been all through that, and anything incriminating has been weeded out.
They wasn't much,--some envelopes and letters, but nothing of any
account. Oh, well, straws show which way the wind blows, and we've got
some several straws!"

"Is this one?" and Norah pointed to the carriage check, which still lay
on the desk.

[Illustration: Carriage Check/The Electric Carriage Call Co.]

"Nope. Me and the Chief, we decided that didn't mean nothing at all. It's
old, you can see, from its grimy look, so it wasn't left here yesterday.
Those things are always clean and fresh when they're given out, and
that's sorta soiled with age, you see."

"Well!" I exclaimed, "_why_ would a carriage check be soiled with age?
They're used the same day they're given out. Why is it here, anyway?"

Hudson looked interested. "That's so, Mr. Brice," he admitted. "I take it
that there check was given to Mr. Gately at some hotel, say. Well, he
didn't use it for some reason or other, and brought it home in his
pocket. But as you say, why is it here? _Why_ did he keep it? And, what
did he do with it to give it that thumbed, used look?"

We all examined the check. A bit of white cardboard, about two by four
inches in size, and pierced with seven circular holes in irregular order.
Across the top was printed "Don't fold this card," and at one end was the
number 743 in large red letters. Also, the right-hand upper corner was
sliced off.

"Why," I exclaimed, "here's a narrow strip of paper pasted across the
end, and--look,--it's almost transparent! I can read through it--'Hotel
St. Charles!' That's where it came from!"

"Hold your horses!" and Hudson smiled condescendingly, "that's where it
_didn't_ come from! It came from any hotel _except_ the St. Charles. You
may not know it, but often a hotel will use electric call-checks of other
hotels, with a slip of paper pasted over the name. That's an item for you
to remember. No, Mr. Brice, I can't attach any importance to that check,
but I'm free to confess I don't see why it's there. Unless Mr. Gately
found it in his pocket after it had been there unnoticed for some time.
And yet, it is very much thumbed, isn't it? That's queer. Maybe he used
it for a bookmark, or something like that."

"Maybe the lady left it here," suggested Norah. "The same time she left
her hatpin."

"Now, maybe she did," and Foxy Jim Hudson smiled benignly at her. "Any
ways, you've made the thing seem curious, and I guess I'll keep it for a
while."

He put the card away in his pocketbook, and Norah and I grinned at each
other in satisfaction that we had given him a clew to ponder over.

"You know, Mr. Brice," Hudson remarked, after another period of silent
thought, "you missed it, when you didn't fly in here quicker and catch
the murderer redhanded."

"If I'd known that the first door, Jenny's door, was the only one I could
open, of course I should have gone there first. But I'd never been in
here at all,--I've only been in the building a week or so, and I _did_
lose valuable time running from one door to another. But I still think
it's queer that I didn't see anything of the man Jenny describes."

"One reason is, there wasn't any such man," and Hudson seemed to enjoy my
blank look.

"What became of the murderer, then?"

"Went down in the car with Mr. Gately. Private elevator. Shot him on the
way down----"

"But man, I heard the shot,--and this room was full of smoke."

"Shot him twice, then. Say the first time, Mr. Gately wasn't killed and
could get into the elevator. Then murderer jumps in, too, and finishes
the job on the way down. It's a long trip to the ground floor, you know.
Then, murderer leaves elevator, slams door shut, and walks off."

I ruminated on this. It seemed absurd on the face of it, and yet----

"Why, then, did Jenny say she saw a man?" demanded Norah.

"Maybe she thought she did,--you know people think they see what they
think they ought to see. Jenny heard a shot, and running in, she
_expected_ to see a man with a pistol,--therefore, she thought she _did_
see him. Or, again, the girl is quite capable of making up a yarn out of
the solid. For the dramatic effect, you know, and to put her silly little
self in the limelight."

This was not unbelievable. Jenny was most unreliable as a witness. She
stumbled and contradicted herself as to the man's hat and had given
conflicting testimony about his overcoat.

"Well, as I say, Mr. Brice, the chance was yours to be on the spot but
you missed it. Of course, you are not to blame,--but it's a pity. Now,
s'pose you tell me again, as near as you can rec'lect, about that other
shadow,--the one that wasn't Mr. Gately."

I tried hard to add to my previously related details, but found it
impossible to do so.

"Well, could it have been a woman?"

"At first I should have said no, Mr. Hudson. But on thinking it over, I
suppose I may say it _could_ have been but I do not think it was."

"You know nowadays the women folks wear their hair plastered so close to
their heads that their heads wouldn't shadow up any bigger'n a man's."

"That's so," cried Norah. "A woman's head is smaller than a man's, but
her hair makes it appear larger in a shadow. Unless, as Mr. Hudson says,
she wore it wrapped round her head,--and didn't have much, anyway."

"You go outside, Mr. Brice," directed Hudson, "and look at the shadows of
me and Miss MacCormack, and then come back and tell us what you can
notice."

I did this, and the two heads were shadowed forth on the same door that I
had watched the day before. But the brighter daylight made the shadows
even more vague than yesterday, and I returned without much information.

"I could tell which was which, of course," I reported, "but it's true
that if I hadn't known you people at all, I could have mistaken Norah's
head for a man, and I might have believed, Hudson, that you were a woman.
It's surprising how little individuality was shown in the shadows."

"Well, of course they were clearer yesterday, as the hall was darker,"
mused Hudson. "After all, Mr. Brice, your testimony can't amount to much
unless we can get the actual murderer behind that glass, and some
peculiar shape or characteristic makes you recognize the head beyond all
doubt."

"I think I could do that," I returned; "for though I can't describe any
peculiarity, I'm sure I'd recognize the _same_ head."

"You are?" and Hudson looked at me keenly. "Well, perhaps we'll try you
out on that."

They had a definite suspect, then. And they proposed to experiment with
my memory. Well, I was ready, whenever they were.

Norah and I went into the third room, Hudson making no objection. At
another time we would have been deeply interested in the pictures and the
furnishings but now we had eyes and thoughts only for one thing.

We looked behind the war map and saw the elevator door, but could not
open it.

"The car's down," spoke up Hudson, who was watching us sharply. "I dunno
will it ever be used again. Though I suppose these rooms will be let to
somebody else, some time. Mr. Gately's things here will be sent to his
house, I expect, but his estate is a big one and will take a deal of
settling."

"Who's his executor?"

"Mr. Pond, his lawyer. But his financial affairs are all right. Nothing
crooked about Amos Gately--financially. You can bank on that!"

"How, then?" I asked, for the tone implied a mental reservation.

"I'm not saying. But they do say every man has a secret side to his life,
and why should Mr. Gately be a lone exception?"

"A woman?" asked Norah, always harking back to her basic suspicion.

Foxy Jim Hudson favored her with that blank stare which not infrequently
was his answer to an unwelcome question, and which, perhaps, had a share
in earning him his sobriquet.

Then he laughed, and said, "You've been reading detective stories, miss.
And you remember how they always say 'Churches lay femmy!' Well, go ahead
and church, if you like. But be prepared for a sad and sorrowful result."

The man was obviously deeply moved, and his big, homely face worked with
emotion.

But as he would tell us nothing further, and as Norah and I had finished
our rather unproductive search of the rooms, we went back to my office.

Here Norah showed me what she had taken from the waste basket.

"I'll give it back to him, if you say so," she offered; "but he could do
nothing with it, and maybe I can."

It was only a tiny scrap of pinkish paper, thin and greatly crumpled. I
took it.

"Be careful," warned Norah; "I don't suppose it could show finger prints,
but anyway, it's a sort of a kind of a clew."

"But what is it?" I asked, blankly, as I held the crumpled paper gingerly
in thumb and forefinger.

"It's a powder-paper," vouchsafed Norah, briefly.

"A what?"

"A powder-paper. Women carry them,--they come in little books. That's one
of the leaves. They're to rub on your face, and the powder comes off on
your nose or cheeks."

"Is that so? I never saw any before."

"Lots of girls use them." Norah's clear, wholesome complexion refuted any
idea of her needing such, and she spoke a bit scornfully.

"Proving once more the presence of what Friend Hudson calls a femmy," I
smiled.

"Yes; but these things have great individuality, Mr. Brice. This is of
exceedingly fine quality, it has a distinct, definite fragrance, and is
undoubtedly an imported article,--from France, likely."

"Can they get such things over now?"

"Oh, pshaw, it may have been imported before the war. This quality would
keep its odor forever! Anyway, don't you believe we could trace the woman
who used it and left it there? It must have happened yesterday, for the
basket is, of course, emptied every day in that office."

"Good girl, Norah!" and I nodded approval. "You are truly a She Sherlock!
A bit intimate, isn't it, for a woman to powder her nose in a man's
office?"

"Not at all, Mr. Old Fogey! Why, you can see the girls doing that
everywhere, nowadays. In the street-cars, in the theater,--anywhere."

"All right. How do you propose to proceed?"

"I think I'll go to the smartest Fifth Avenue perfume shops and try to
get a line on the maker of this paper."

My door opened then, and the Chief of Police stood in the doorway.

"Will you come over, across the hall, Mr. Brice?" he said.

"May I come?" piped up Norah, and without waiting for the answer, which,
by the way, never came, she followed us.

"We have learned a great deal," began the Chief, as I waited,
inquiringly. "And, now think carefully, Mr. Brice, I want you to tell me
if the head you saw shadowed on the door, could by any possibility have
been a woman's head?"

"I think it could have been, Chief; we've been talking that over, and I'm
prepared to say that it could have been,--but I don't think it was."

"And the shoulders? Though broad, like a man's, might not a woman's
figure, say, wrapped in furs, give a similar effect?"

An icy chill went through me, but I answered, "It might; the outlines
were very indistinct."

"We are carefully investigating the movements of Miss Raynor," he went
on, steadily, "and we find she told a deliberate untruth about where she
spent yesterday afternoon. She said she was at the house of a friend on
Park Avenue. We learned the name of the young lady and she says Miss
Raynor was not there at all yesterday. Also, we find that Miss Raynor was
in this office _after_ the calls of the old people we know about, and not
_before_ them, as Miss Raynor herself testified."

"But----" I began.

"Wait a moment, please. This is positively proved by the fact that a
check drawn to Miss Raynor by Mr. Gately follows immediately _after_ the
two checks drawn to Mr. Smith and Mrs. Driggs."

"Proving?" I gasped.

"That Miss Raynor is the last one known to be in this room before the
shooting occurred."

"Oh," cried Norah, "for shame! To suspect that lovely girl! Why, she
wouldn't harm a fly!"

"Do you know her?"

"No, sir; but----"

"It is an oft proven fact that the mildest, gentlest woman, if
sufficiently provoked to it, or if given a sudden opportunity, will in a
moment of passion do what no one would dream she could do! Miss Raynor
was very angry with her uncle,--Jenny admitted that, after much delay.
Mr. Gately had a revolver, usually in his desk drawer, but _not_ there
now. And,"--an impressive pause preceded the next argument, "Mr. Amory
Manning is not to be found."

"What do you deduce from that?" I asked, amazedly.

"That he has purposely disappeared, lest he be brought as a witness
against Miss Raynor. He could best help her cause, by being out of town
and impossible to locate. So, he went off, and she pretended she did not
know it. Of course, she did,--they connived at it----"

"Stop!" I cried, "you are romancing. You are assuming conditions that are
untrue!"

"I wish it were so," and the Chief exhibited a very human aspect for the
moment; "but I have no choice in the matter. I am driven by an inexorable
army of facts that cannot be beaten back. What else can you think of that
would account for Mr. Manning's sudden disappearance? Attacked? Nonsense!
Not in the storm of last evening. Abducted? Why? He is an inoffensive
citizen, not a millionaire or man of influence. You said you saw him last
night, Mr. Brice. Where, exactly, was that?"

I told of my trip down in the Third Avenue car, and of my getting off at
Twenty-second Street, meaning to speak to Mr. Manning. Then I told of his
sudden, almost mysterious disappearance.

"Not mysterious at all," said the Chief. "He gave you the slip purposely.
He went away at once, and has hidden himself carefully. But we will find
him. It's not easy for a man to hide from the police in this day and
generation!"

"But, Miss Raynor!" I said, still incredulous. "Why? What motive?"

"Because her uncle wouldn't let her marry Amory Manning. When she said
she went to her friend, Miss Clark's house, she really went to the home
of a Mrs. Russell, the sister of Manning. She was to meet Manning there.
I have all this straight from Mrs. Russell."

"And you think it was Miss Raynor's shadow I saw on the door!"

"You said it might have been a woman."

"Very well, then look for another woman! It was never Miss Raynor!"

"Your indignation, Mr. Brice, is both natural and admirable, but it is
based on your disinclination to think ill of Miss Raynor. The police are
not allowed the luxury of such sentiments."

"But--but--how did she--how did Miss Raynor get out of the room?"

"We do not entirely credit Jenny's story of the man with a revolver
running downstairs. And we do think that the person who did the shooting
may have gone down in the private elevator with the victim. It would be
easy to gain the street unnoticed, and it presupposes someone acquainted
with the working of the automatic elevator."

"But Miss Raynor said she had never seen it," I cried, triumphantly. "She
said she had only heard her uncle speak of it!"

"I know she _said_ so," returned the Chief.




                              CHAPTER VII
                            Hudson's Errand


For a day or two I moped around, decidedly out of sorts. I didn't feel
sufficiently acquainted with Miss Raynor to call on her,--though she had
once asked me to do so,--but I greatly longed to find out if the police
had yet acquainted her with their suspicions. I thought perhaps they were
waiting for further proofs, or it might be, waiting until after the
funeral of Mr. Gately. There had been, so far, nothing in the papers
implicating Olive, and I hoped against hope there would not be. But I
felt sure she was being closely watched, and I didn't know what new
evidence might be cooking up against her.

The funeral of the great capitalist was on Saturday evening.

I attended, and this being my first visit to the house, I was all
unprepared for the wealth of art treasures it held.

I sat in the great salon, lost in admiration of the pictures and bronzes,
as well as the beautiful architecture and mural decorations.

A throng of people attended the services and the oppressive fragrance of
massed flowers and the continuous click of folding-chairs, combined with
the whispers and subdued rustling of the audience, produced that
unmistakable funeral atmosphere so trying to sensitive nerves.

Then, a single clear, sweet soprano voice, raised in a solemn anthem,
broke the tension, and soon the brief obsequies were over, and I found
myself moving along with the crush of people slowly surging toward the
door.

I walked home, the clear, frosty air feeling grateful after the crowded
rooms.

And I wondered. Wondered what would be the next scene in the awful drama.
Would they accuse Miss Raynor,--lovely Olive Raynor, of the crime? How
could they? That delicate, high-bred girl!

And yet, she was independent of thought and fearless of action.

Though I knew her but slightly, I had heard more or less about her, and I
had learned she was by no means of a yielding or easily swayed
disposition. She deeply resented her guardian's tyrannical treatment of
her and had not infrequently told him so. While they were not outwardly
at odds, they were uncongenial natures, and of widely divergent tastes.

Olive, as is natural for a young girl, wanted guests and gayety. Mr.
Gately, a thoroughly selfish man, preferred quiet and freedom from
company. Her insistence met with refusal and the results were often
distressing to both of them. In fact, Miss Raynor had threatened to leave
her guardian's home and live by herself, but this by no means suited his
convenience. The comfort of his home and the proper administration of his
household depended largely on Olive's capable and efficient management,
and without her presence and care he would miss many pleasant details of
his daily existence. He rarely allowed her to go away on a visit, and
almost never permitted her to have a friend to stay with her.

I learned of these intimate matters from Norah,--who, in turn, had them
from Jenny.

Jenny had not been with Mr. Gately long, but she had managed to pick up
bits of information regarding his home life with surprising quickness,
and when quizzed by the police had told all she knew,--and, I
suspected,--_more_ than she knew,--about Miss Raynor.

Now, I don't suppose the police went so far as to assume that Olive
Raynor had killed Mr. Gately because he would not indulge her wishes, but
they seemed to think they really had grounds for suspecting.

I was in despair. On Sunday, I could think of nothing but the matter and
I wondered if it would be too presumptuous of me to offer Miss Raynor my
help or advice. Doubtless she had hordes of advisers, but she might need
such a legal friend as I could be to her.

On the impulse, I telephoned and asked if she cared to see me. To my
delighted surprise she welcomed the suggestion and begged me to call that
afternoon, as she had real need of legal advice.

And so four o'clock found me again at the house of the late president of
the Trust Company.

This time I was shown to a small reception room, where Olive soon
appeared.

"It's this way, Mr. Brice," she said after a few moments' conversation.
"I don't like Mr. Pond,--he's Uncle's lawyer,--I just can't bear the
man!"

"For any definite reason, Miss Raynor?" I asked.

"N--no,--well, that is--oh, he's a horrid old thing, and he wants to
marry me!"

"Are you quite sure you want to confide these personal matters to me?" I
felt I ought to say this, for the girl was nervously excited, and I was
by no means sure she would not later regret her outspokenness.

"Yes, I do. I want a lawyer, Mr. Brice, and I will not have Mr. Pond. So
I ask you here and now to take my affairs in charge, look after my
financial matters, and advise me in many ways when I need your help. You
may suppose I have many friends,"--the big brown eyes were pathetically
imploring, "but I haven't. Uncle Amos,--of course, you know he was not my
uncle, but I called him that,--would not allow me to make many friends
and his own acquaintances are all elderly people and he hadn't very many
of those. My money is in my own right. Mr. Gately was punctilious in his
care of my accounts,--and I want it all taken out of the hands of Mr.
Pond and transferred to your care. This can be done, of course."

Olive looked imperious and seemed to think the matter all settled.

"Doubtless it can be arranged, Miss Raynor; I will consider it."

"Don't consider,--just say yes! If you don't I must hunt up another
lawyer, and--I'd rather have you."

I wasn't proof against her pretty, dictatorial ways, and I agreed to take
the steps she desired.

She went on to tell me how she was placed:

Not only in possession of a considerable fortune of her own, Amos
Gately's will left her a goodly additional sum, and also the house in
which they had lived.

"So you see," Olive said, "I shall continue to live here,--for the
present. I have Mrs. Vail now with me,--as a duenna, for propriety's
sake. She is a dear old lady, and is of a pliable, manageable sort. I
chose her for that reason, largely. Also, she is pleasant and cheerful,
and I like to have her about. I was fond of Uncle Amos, Mr. Brice, but we
had many dissensions. If he had allowed me a little more freedom, I could
have got along with him beautifully,--but he treated me as a child. You
see, he took me to live with him when I _was_ a child, and he never
realized that I had grown up and had an individuality and a will of my
own. I am twenty-two years old, and he acted as if I were twelve!"

"And now, absolutely your own mistress?"

"Yes; doesn't it seem strange? And it is _all_ so strange! This house,
without him, is like a different house. And the dreadfulness of his
death! Sometimes I think I can't stay here,--I must get into other
surroundings. But the thought of moving out of here is too much for me,
at present, anyway. Oh, I don't know _what_ to do! I can't realize that
he is gone!"

Olive did not cry. She sat, dry-eyed and tearless, looking so
pathetically lonely and so unable to cope with her new responsibilities,
that I gladly promised her all possible assistance that I could give,
both in legal matters and in any personal or friendly ways.

"Don't think me helpless," she said, reading my thoughts; "I shall rise
to the situation, I shall adapt myself to my changed circumstances, but
it will take a little time, of course."

"Yes, indeed," I agreed, "and don't attempt to do too much at first. Take
plenty of time to rest and to let yourself react from the shock and the
awful scenes you have been through."

It was clear to me that the girl had no thought that she was suspected,
or that the police were watching her. I wondered whether it would be
kinder to give her a hint of this or to leave her in ignorance, when just
then a servant entered, saying Mr. Hudson wished an interview with Miss
Raynor.

Hudson! Foxy Jim Hudson! Of course, this could mean but one thing.

"Let me stay!" I said, impulsively, and, "Oh, do!" she returned, and in
another minute Hudson came in.

There was something about the man's manner that I couldn't help liking
and if Olive had to be questioned I felt sure he would do it as gently as
anybody could.

Though uncultured, his voice was kindly, and as he put some preliminary
questions Olive answered straightforwardly and without objection.

But when he asked her where she had been on the afternoon of Mr. Gately's
death, she looked at him haughtily, and said:

"I told all that to the man who questioned me downtown,--that Mr.
Martin."

"Did you tell him the truth, Miss Raynor?"

"Sir?"

Into the one word, Olive put a world of scornful pride, but I could note
also a look of fear in her eyes.

"Now, let me give you a bit of friendly advice," Hudson said, "you're a
very young lady, and you prob'ly think you can tell a little white
falsehood and get away with it, but you can't do it to the police. You
see, miss, we know where you were on Wednesday afternoon, and you may as
well be frank about it."

"Very well, then, where was I?"

"At the house of Mrs. Russell,--the sister of Mr. Manning."

Olive looked at him in amazement. Then her manner changed.

"Since you know," she said, "I may as well own up. I _was_ at Mrs.
Russell's. What of it?"

"Only that if you prevaricated in one instance, Miss Raynor, you may have
done so in others. Will you tell me why you said you were at the house of
your friend, Miss Clark?"

"Of course I will. My guardian was unwilling to have me go to Mrs.
Russell's house, because of a personal matter. Therefore, when I wished
to go there I sometimes told him that I was going to Miss Clark's. This
small falsehood I considered justifiable, because Mr. Gately had no right
to say where I should go and where not! If I was untruthful it was
because his unjust rules and regulations made me so! I am not a
story-teller, ordinarily. If I was forced to be one, in order to enjoy
some simple pleasures or diversions, it is no one's business but my own."

"That's true, Hudson," I interposed, "why constitute yourself Miss
Raynor's Sunday-School teacher?"

"Sorry I am to do so," and the good-natured face showed real regret; "but
I've orders. Now, Miss Raynor, I must put you a few straight questions.
Where's Mr. Amory Manning?"

"I don't know! I only wish I did!"

"Now, now, that won't do! I guess you can think up some hint of his
whereabouts for me. You can't deceive us, you know."

"Nor do I want to!" Olive's eyes blazed. "Because I found it necessary to
evade my guardian's espionage now and then you needn't think I am unable
to tell the truth! I have no idea where Mr. Manning is, and I am
exceedingly anxious lest some harm has befallen him. If you can find him
you will be doing me a great favor."

"Are you engaged to him, Miss Raynor?"

"No, I am not, though I do not concede your right to ask that question.
Mr. Manning and I are good friends, that is all."

"Mr. Gately did not approve of his attentions to you?"

"He did not, and that was why I refrained from telling of occasions when
I saw or might see Mr. Manning at his sister's house. If that is of
interest to you, I've no objections to your knowing it."

"Can you fire a pistol, Miss Raynor?"

I perceived it was Hudson's method to take her by surprise, and so,
perhaps, learn something from an answer given off her guard.

"Yes," she replied, promptly, "I am a good shot; why?"

Her wondering eyes were fearless, now, and to me it seemed a proof of her
entire innocence that she showed no embarrassment at this inquiry.

But Hudson evidently thought differently. He looked accusingly at her,
and continued, "Do you own a pistol?"

"Yes; Mr. Gately gave me one a few years ago."

"Where is it?"

"Down at our country-place, on Long Island. I am afraid of burglars
there, but not nearly so much so in the city."

"H'm. Now, Miss Raynor, you are the last one known to have seen Amos
Gately alive."

"Why, Mr. Brice saw the shooting!"

"Only in shadow. I mean you are the last one known to have talked with
him in his office. Was your interview--er,--amicable?"

"Entirely so. I went there for some money, as I occasionally did. My
guardian gave me a check and I cashed it at the Trust Company Bank."

"Yes, we know that; and that the check was given to you, and was later
cashed, all at about the time Mr. Gately was killed."

"Earlier Mr. Hudson. I was in the bank about half-past two."

"No, Miss Raynor. We have the teller's statement that you were there
about three o'clock."

"He is mistaken," Olive's voice was confident, and had in it a ring of
indignation, "by three o'clock, or very little after, I was at Mrs.
Russell's."

"Was Mr. Manning there?"

"No; he expected to come later, after he had attended to some business."

"What was the business?"

"I do not know, but it must have been somewhere in the vicinity of the
Puritan Building, for he was near there when I arrived."

"At what time was that?"

"I don't know exactly, perhaps half-past three or a little later. I had
been at Mrs. Russell's but a few moments when Mr. Talcott telephoned me
there."

"How did he know you were there?"

"He called up Miss Clark first, and she told him."

"Your friends, then, aided and abetted you in deceiving your guardian?"

"I resent the way you put that, Mr. Hudson," Olive looked at him
haughtily, "but I answer, yes. My friends agreed with me that Mr. Gately
was unreasonable in his commands and that I was not bound to obey them."

"But you are now freed from his injustice."

"That is a brutal speech and unworthy of any man! My freedom is too
dearly purchased at such a fearful price!"

"Are you _sure_ you think so?"

"What are you implying, Mr. Hudson? Speak out! Do you think I killed my
guardian?"

"There are people that do think that, Miss Raynor."

"Leave this house!" cried Olive, rising. "Such words can not be spoken
here!"

"Now, now, miss, dramatics won't get you anywheres! There is evidence
against you, or so the police think, and it's up to me to tell you that
we must ask you not to go out of town without acquainting us of the fact.
We do not accuse you, but we do want you where we can communicate with
you at will. I am going now Miss Raynor. I came only to make sure on a
few points,--which I have done,--and to tell you to remain within call.
Indeed, I may as well tell you that any attempt to get away will be
frustrated."

"You mean I am under surveillance!"

"That's about it, miss."

Olive looked at him as one might regard a worm of the dust.

"Go!" she said, quietly but forcefully. "I shall not leave town, I shall
probably not leave this house. Your suspicion is beneath contempt.
However, it has taught me one thing,--I shall engage someone
else--someone quite outside the stupid police, to discover the murderer
of my uncle! And also to trace my friend, Mr. Manning."

Hudson smiled. He looked at Olive almost tolerantly, as if she were a
wilful child.

"All right. Miss Raynor. I'll take your word as to your staying here, and
I rather guess the police force will yet round up the murderer and will
also discover the hiding-place of Amory Manning. Good day."

Hudson went away, and Olive turned to me in a passion of rage.

"What insolence!" she exclaimed. "Are such things permitted? To come here
and practically accuse me of my uncle's murder!"

"He wasn't your uncle, you know."

"That doesn't matter. I loved him as I would a relative. His sternness
and his unreasonable commands were distasteful to me, but that didn't
alter my real love and affection for the man. He has been everything to
me for the greater part of my life. He has been kindness itself in most
matters. He indulged me in all possible ways as to creature comforts and
luxuries. He never criticized the ways in which I spent my money, or in
which I entertained myself, save in the matter of having guests or making
visits."

"And allowing admirers?"

"There were some men he approved of,--you may as well know, Mr. Brice, my
guardian wished me to marry his friend and lawyer, Mr. Pond."

"Why, when that gentleman is so greatly your senior?"

"Merely because Uncle was so fond of him. And, too, Uncle never seemed to
realize that I was of a different generation from himself. He couldn't
understand,--he really couldn't--why I wanted young company and gay
parties. _He_ didn't, and he really assumed that _I_ didn't. I think he
never realized how greatly he was depriving me when he forbade me
society."

"Did it really amount to that?"

"Practically. Or, if I succeeded in persuading him to let me have a house
guest or a small party, he made things so unpleasant that I was glad when
they were gone."

"Unpleasant, how?"

"Oh, fussing around, as if his comfort were interfered with,--as if he
were terribly incommoded by their presence, and by demanding my time and
attention for himself, instead of allowing me to entertain my guests
properly."

"Doubtless so you wouldn't do it again."

"Yes, of course. But all that was uncomfortable for me,--almost
unbearable,--yet one doesn't kill one's people for such things."

To me this simple statement of Olive Raynor's was more convincing than a
storm of denial. She had stormed, with indignation, at the hint of
suspicion, but her quiet, dignified refutation went far to assure me of
her entire innocence.

"Of course, one doesn't," I agreed, "and now to find out who did do it.
Have you any suspicion,--Miss Raynor, even the slightest?"

"No; except that it seems to me it must have been some man who knew Uncle
in a business way. Though a generous and charitable man, Amos Gately was
scrupulously just, and if he had enemies, they were men whom he had
discovered in some wrong-doing and he had exposed or punished them. No
man had a cause for righteous enmity against him,--of that I'm sure!"




                              CHAPTER VIII
                   The Man Who Fell Through the Earth


"And it is for me," Olive went on, with a solemn look in her brown eyes,
"to avenge the death of my guardian. I am not worried about this
surveillance, or whatever they call it, of myself,--it is too absurd to
take very seriously. Of course, I shall not leave the city, and I will
answer any questions the police may put to me. For, you see, Mr. Brice,
the only reason I had for telling falsehoods is a reason no longer. I did
resort to 'white lies' because Uncle Amos was so unreasonably strict with
me, but I've no further need for that sort of thing, and I assure you you
will find me absolutely truthful from now on."

A sad little smile accompanied the words, and an earnest expression on
the delicate, high-bred face gave me implicit confidence in her
sincerity.

"Then," I hastened to advise her, "do not antagonize the police. If they
have you under their eye, rest assured they think there is some reason to
watch you. Be friendly, or, at least patient with them, and they will all
the sooner be aware of their mistake. Moreover, you want their help in
running down the real murderer of your guardian. It is a mysterious
affair, Miss Raynor."

"Oh, it is, Mr. Brice, and it may be that in penetrating the mystery we
may unearth something--you know,--something detrimental to Mr. Gately's
character."

"Have you any such fear--definitely, I mean?"

"Not definitely, no. If I had I should tell you. But in a vague,
apprehensive way, I feel there must be something in his life that brought
this about, and that I as yet know nothing of. But you think, don't you,
that we must go ahead and learn all we can?"

"You are not afraid, then, of investigation, for yourself--or, for anyone
else?"

I put this query after a moment's hesitation, yet I had to know.

"No, sir," her voice rang out clearly. "I know what you mean, you are
thinking of Mr. Manning. And there is another task for you. We must find
Amory Manning. That man never went away, voluntarily, without sending me
some word. He said he would come up here that night,--the night of
Uncle's death. He didn't come, nor did he communicate with me in any way.
That means he was unable to do so."

"But what could have happened that would make it impossible for him to
send you some word?"

"I don't know--I can't think, I'm sure. But he was attacked or overcome
by someone who wanted him put out of the way. Mr. Manning had
enemies,--that much I may tell you----"

"Do you know more? That you can _not_ tell me?"

"No; that is, I don't _know_ anything,--but I have some foreboding,--oh,
nothing definite, Mr. Brice, but I can't help fearing we shall never see
Amory Manning alive again!"

"I don't want to force your confidence, but can't you tell me a few more
facts? Why has he enemies? Are they political?"

"Yes; in a way. Don't ask me now anyway. Let us try to find Amory and if
we fail, I may decide it my duty to tell you what I now withhold."

And with this I was forced to be content. For Olive Raynor did not talk
like a young, inexperienced girl, as I had thought her; she gave me now
the impression of a young woman involved in weighty matters, and the
trusted holder of important secrets.

"To begin with, then," I said, "suppose we try first to find Mr.
Manning,--or to learn what became of him."

"Yes," she agreed; "but how shall we set about it? I've already
telephoned to several of his friends, whom I know, and none of them has
seen him since that day,--the day of Uncle's death. Thank Heaven nobody
is foolish enough to blame that on him!"

"They couldn't very well, as he was with you when the discovery was
made."

"I know it. And for the police to say he ran away to hide to protect me
from suspicion is just about the most absurd theory possible!"

"I think so, too. Now, to get down to dates. Have you heard anything of
Mr. Manning later than the time when I saw him get off the Third Avenue
car on his way home that night?"

"No, I haven't. And we know he never reached his home. His rooms are in a
house on Gramercy Park----"

"That's why he got off at Twenty-second Street----"

"Yes, of course. He left you there, didn't he?"

"We both got off the car there. My own rooms are in the same locality.
But the snow squall was a whirlwind at the corner, and my glasses were so
covered with flakes that I couldn't see a thing for a moment, and when I
could, Manning had got out of sight. I didn't know then in just what
direction he lived, so I looked all four ways but I didn't see him.
However, in the black squall, one couldn't see half a dozen steps
anyway."

"Of course, he started toward his home,--perhaps, he almost reached
it,--when whoever was lying in wait for him attacked him."

"Why are you so sure he was attacked? He may have had an errand in some
other direction."

"I sort of see the thing as a picture. And as he got out at that corner I
naturally see him going straight home. It is not likely that he would be
going on some other errand, and yet get off at that corner."

"No; I suppose not."

"Well, then, as he never did go home,--hasn't been there yet,--what
theory is there except that he was prevented from going there? He may
have been kidnaped,--don't smile, it is among the possibilities,--or, he
may have met with a serious accident,--slipped and broken his leg or
something of that sort. But in such a case, he would have been taken to a
hospital, and I should have heard of it. No, Mr. Brice, he was carried
off by some powerful enemy. I say powerful, meaning rather, clever or
diplomatic, for as I see it, trickery would have been used, not force, to
abduct Amory Manning."

"But why abduct him?" I cried in amazement "What is he? Why is he a
menace?"

"I can't tell you, Mr. Brice, unless it becomes gravely necessary. But it
has to do with--with men higher up,--and it has nothing to do with my
guardian's death,--of that I'm certain."

"Very well, Miss Raynor; I trust you, of course, that goes without
saying, but I also trust your judgment in reserving your full confidence
in this matter."

"You may. I assure you I will tell you all, if it becomes imperative that
I do so. Meantime, let us try to find some trace of him."

"You have tried the hospitals?"

"Yes; I have telephoned to some of them, and I asked our family doctor to
inquire of others. He did so, but with only negative results. Now----"

"Now, it's time to call in a detective," I said, positively. "And I don't
mean a mere police detective, but a special investigator. Have you any
objection to such a course?"

"No; not if we get a good one. I don't know much about such things, but
don't some of those all-wise detectives have more theories and deductions
than results?"

"You have put your finger on a vital flaw in the usual Smarty-Cat
detective," I laughed. "But I know of a splendid man. He is eccentric, I
admit, but beyond that he has none of the earmarks of the Transcendental
Detective of the story-books. He is intelligent rather than cocksure and
efficient rather than spectacular. He _is_ expensive, but no more so than
his success warrants."

"That sounds well. But first, Mr. Brice, can't we do a little
investigating by ourselves? I had hoped so. To engage a detective is to
make the whole affair so public, and I shrink from that."

"Not necessarily, Miss Raynor. If the man I speak of should take the
case, he would make no fuss or stir about it. And if you say so, he can
also try to find the man who killed Amos Gately."

"Oh, that is what I want! Yes, let us retain--or whatever the procedure
is, your detective. What is his name?"

"Don't laugh, but it is Penny Wise!"

"What? How ridiculous!"

"Yes, but true. Pennington Wise is on his visiting cards, but no human
nature could refrain from the inevitable nickname."

"He ought to change that name! It's enough to belittle any good work he
might do!"

"Well, he doesn't think so. In fact, he has become so used to having
people joke about it that he only smiles perfunctorily and goes on about
his business."

"Will you ask him to help us?"

"Of course I will, and if not too busy on some other matter he will
doubtless begin at once."

"I feel so young and inexperienced," Olive shuddered, "to be deciding
these big things. It seems as if someone older and wiser ought to direct
me. Oh, I know I have your help and counsel, but I wish I had some
relative or near friend on whose judgment I could rely. I am singularly
alone in the world, Mr. Brice."

"You have Mrs. Vail?"

"My companion? She is delightful as a chaperon and promises to be most
pleasant and congenial in my home life, but she is not capable of giving
me any advice of value in these important affairs."

"You are indeed alone, Miss Raynor, but you are amazingly capable for a
young woman and you continually surprise me by your grasp of the
situation and your ability to rise to its demands."

"If I only had Amory Manning to help me."

Poor child, I knew that was at the bottom of her loneliness, and though I
didn't presume to sympathize, I felt privileged to assure her of my
personal help as well as my interested performance of my legal duties.

"Well, then, Mr. Brice," she responded, "there is one thing I want you to
do for me. I want you to go to the morgue. I can't bring myself to do
that, nor do I want to ask anyone else I know to do so."

"Certainly," I replied, instinctively treating the matter casually, for I
saw she was deeply moved. "It will be merely a form, but it is better to
feel we have made every possible inquiry and left no stone unturned. I
will go there at once,--now, if you say so."

She seemed gratified at my prompt compliance, and urged my going
immediately.

"Come back this evening and report," she said, and then, with one of
those sudden changes of demeanor which I was beginning to learn were
characteristic of her, she bade me good afternoon with a quick, curt
manner, and practically dismissed me.

I started on my grewsome errand with enough food for thought to set my
brain in a whirl. I was deeply in the matter now, and quite satisfied
that it should be so. I was the lawyer and adviser of Miss Raynor, and I
determined to do my best to deserve and justify her choice. Hitherto
obscure, I should now be looked up to by members of my profession with
envy--and, doubtless, with criticism. The latter, I meant to take good
care, should be favorable.

As I looked at it I had three distinct missions. First, to arrange and
attend to all of Miss Raynor's financial matters. Second, to assist her
to track down the murderer of Amos Gately. Third, to help her to find, or
to learn the fate of Amory Manning.

The first was my only personal charge. The other two must be accomplished
by Wise, and for my part I felt sure he would succeed.

My visit to the morgue, as I had surmised, brought no result. The poor
unfortunates whose mortal remains had been brought there during or since
Wednesday, the day of Manning's disappearance, could by no stretch of the
imagination be thought to look like Amory Manning.

Though I had never seen him until that day, I had a vivid picture of the
man, large-framed, well set up, and with a general air of forcefulness
and power. I had watched his face, as we stood in the crowded street-car,
too far apart for conversation, yet in full view of each other.

His face was strong and scholarly, the latter effect enhanced by his
huge, shell-rimmed glasses, and he had thick, rather coarse dark hair.
Also a dark Vandyke beard and small mustache, both carefully trimmed.

"No," I said to the morgue-keeper, "the man I'm looking for isn't here."

I went on to tell him of Manning, in case he knew anything to tell me.
But he only said, briefly:

"You're not the first, sir. The police have looked here for Mr. Manning
and some others have done so beside."

So the police were ahead of me! Well, that only made it the more certain
that what we sought was not here.

"There was another chap, but he wasn't Mr. Manning either," vouchsafed my
informant. "Howsomever, the police went to see him. Wanta go?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, that same afternoon, there was a corpse picked outa the East River,
froze stiff. Leastways, we thought he was a corpse, but blamed if the
chap didn't come to life!"

I wasn't greatly interested, for if the corpse was taken from the river
that afternoon, it couldn't have been Manning. But the morgue-keeper went
on: "You might take a look, sir, to see if you know him. For the poor
fellow's lost his mind,--no, not that,--but he's lost his memory, and he
dunno who he is!"

"Amnesia?" I asked.

"That's what they call it, and the other thing, too. Aspasia,--or
whatever it is."

"Aphasia," I corrected him, without smiling, for how should he know
anything about what was a mystery to most skilled physicians. "Where is
he?"

"They carted him over to Bellevue soon's they seen he was alive. It was a
touch job to _keep_ him alive, I heard, and his memory is completely
busted. It would be a godsend to him if you could identify him. I ask
everybody to take a look on the chance. Somehow, I'm sorry for him."

I wasn't especially interested, but being thus appealed to in the
interests of humanity, I went over to the hospital, and had no difficulty
in gaining a sight of the patient in question. Indeed, the doctors were
most anxious for visitors to see him, hoping that someone might identify
the man.

My first glance convinced me it was not Amory Manning, though I had not
thought that it was.

This man had thin, light hair and vacant-looking, weak eyes. He was
smooth-shaven and his voice was peculiar,--a voice sufficient to identify
anyone, I felt sure, but it was not a voice I had heard before.

No; I didn't know him, and a careful scrutiny made me positive I did not.

But it was a sorry case. Apparently the man was of good education and
accustomed to cultured surroundings. Moreover, he had a sense of humor
which had not deserted him, along with his memory.

I sat by his bedside, and I remained rather longer than I had intended,
for I became interested in his story, and the time slipped by.

"You see," he said, fixing me with his queer-looking eyes, "I fell
through the earth."

"You what?"

"I did. I fell through the earth, and it was a long, long fall."

"Well, yes, eight thousand miles, I'm told."

"Oh, no," and he was almost pettish, "I didn't fall through the middle of
it."

"Oh," and I paused for further enlightenment.

"It was this way. I remember it perfectly, you know. I was
somewhere,--somewhere up North----"

"Canada?"

"I don't know--I don't know." He shook his head uncertainly. "But I know
it was up North where it's always cold."

Perhaps the man had been an Arctic explorer.

"Iceland?" I said, "Greenland?"

"Maybe," and he looked uninterested. "But," here he brightened a little,
"anyway, I fell through the earth. I fell in _there_, wherever it was,
and came on down, down through the earth till I came out at the other
end."

"You mean, you fell through a section or segment of the globe? As if,
say, you fell in at London and came out at the Cape of Good Hope!"

"That's the idea! Only I fell _out_ here in New York."

"And you fell in?"

"That's what I can't remember, only it was 'way up North,--somewhere."

"If you had a map, now, and looked at all the Northern countries, it
might recall itself to you,--the place where you entered,--where you
began your journey."

"I thought so, but the nurse brought me an atlas and I couldn't find the
place. I wish I had a globe."

Poor chap. I wondered what had given him this strange hallucination. But
as he talked on, I became interested in his own personality.

He was as sane as I was in all respects, save his insistence that he had
fallen through the earth.

As a child, an ambition of mine had been to dig down to China, and many
times I had started the task. Perhaps his childhood had known a similar
ambition, and now, his memory gone, his distorted mind harked back to
that idea. I changed the subject, and found him remarkably well informed,
fairly well educated, and of a curiously analytical temperament, but of
his identity or his personality he had no knowledge.

He appreciated this, and it made the thing more pathetic.

"It will come back to me," he said, cheerfully. "The doctors have
explained all about this aphasic-amnesia, and though mine is the worst
case they have ever seen, it will go away some time, and I'll recover my
memory and know who I am."

"You can reason and understand everything said to you?"

"Oh, yes; I'm my own man in every respect except in a knowledge of who or
what I was before that journey through the earth."

"Then," I tried plain common sense, "then, if you can reason, you must
know that you didn't fall through the earth. It would be impossible."

"I know that. My reason tells me it's impossible. But all I know about it
is, that I did do it."

"Through a long hole,--miles long?"

"Yes."

"Who bored the hole?"

"It was there all the time. I suppose Nature made it."

"Oh, a sort of rock fissure----"

"No; more like a mine,--a----"

"That's it, old chap! You were a miner, and there was a cave-in, and it
spoiled your thinker--temporarily."

"But a mine doesn't have an exit at the bottom of it. I tell you I was
far away from where I fell in, and I came miles straight down through the
solid earth----"

"Could you see plainly?"

"Oh, no, it was dark,--how could it be otherwise, inside the earth?"

It was hopeless to dissuade him. We talked for some time, and outside his
hallucination he was keen and quick-witted. But whatever gave him his
idea of his strange adventure he thoroughly believed in it and nothing
would shake that belief.

"What are you going to do when you get out of here?" I asked him.

"I don't know, I'm sure. But I can't help feeling that the world owes me
a living--especially after I've fallen through it!"

I laughed, for his humor was infectious, and I felt pretty sure he would
make good somehow. He was about thirty, I judged, and though not a brawny
man, he seemed possessed of a wiry strength.

The doctors, he told me, assured him of speedily returning health but
would give no definite promise regarding the return of his memory.

"So," he said, cheerfully, "I'll get along without it, and start out
fresh. Why, I haven't even a name!"

"You can acquire one at small expense," I advised him.

"Yes; I've part of it now. I shall take Rivers as a surname, because they
pulled me out of the East River, they say."

"How were you dressed?"

"In Adam's costume, I'm told. I regret the loss of a full suit of
apparel, more especially as it might have proved my identity."

"You mean you were entirely divested of clothing?"

"Except for a few rags of underwear, entirely worthless as clews to what
was doubtless an illustrious personality! However, I'm lucky to have
breath left in my body, and when I get back my memory, I'll prove that I
really did fall through the earth, and I'll find out where I fell in."

"I sincerely hope you will, old chap," and I shook hands as I rose to go.
"As the play says, 'You interest me strangely!' May I come to see you
again?"

"I wish you would, Mr. Brice, and by that time I shall have chosen me a
first name."




                               CHAPTER IX
                           The Man in Boston


I could not suppress a feeling of elation as I once again rang at the
door of Olive Raynor's home that evening. I almost began to feel a
proprietary interest in the mansion, as I now was practically the legal
adviser of its new mistress. And to be received as a privileged caller,
even a welcome one, was a source of gratification to my pride and
self-respect.

Mrs. Vail was present at our interview this time, and my first sight of
her gave me a very favorable impression. A distinguished-looking lady,
slightly past middle age, she was aristocratic of bearing and kindly
pleasant of manner. Perhaps a trifle of condescension mingled with her
courteous reception of me, but I put that down to her recent acquirement
of a position of importance. No such trait was visible in Miss Raynor's
simple and sincere greeting, and as Olive eagerly inquired as to the
result of my afternoon's quest, I told her my story at once.

She was greatly relieved that no trace of Amory Manning had been found on
the morgue records and though she was duly sympathetic when I told her of
the strange case of the man who fell through the earth, it only
momentarily claimed her preoccupied attention.

She first satisfied herself that by no chance could this man be Manning,
and then turned her thoughts back to her all-engrossing theme.

"I am sorry for him," she said, as I described his cheerful disposition
and rather winning personality, "and if I can do anything to help him, I
will do it. Does he want a position of some sort when he gets well enough
to take one?"

"I suppose he will," I returned; "he's an alive sort of chap, and of
course he'll earn his living one way or another."

"And he may soon recover his memory," began Mrs. Vail. "I knew a man once
who had amnesia and aphasia both, and it was six months before he got
over it. But when his memory came back, it came all at once, like a
flash, and then he was all right."

"In this case," I said, "the doctors want to find someone who knows the
man. It ought not to be difficult to find his friends, or someone who can
identify him. Why, that peculiar voice ought to do it."

"Imitate it," directed Mrs. Vail, and to the best of my ability I talked
in the monotonous tones of the amnesic victim.

Olive laughed. "I never heard anybody talk like that," she said. "It's
absolutely uninflected."

"Yes, that's just what it was. He had no inflections or shadings in his
tones."

"A voice is so individual," pursued Olive. "Amory Manning's voice is full
and musical; I've often told him he conveys as much meaning by his tones
as by his words."

"I knew a man once," put in Mrs. Vail, "who could recite the alphabet so
dramatically that he made his audience laugh or cry or shudder, just by
his tones."

"Yes, I've heard that done on the vaudeville stage," said Olive. "Now Mr.
Brice, what shall be our next step? I don't mind confessing I'm relieved
that your errand of today is over with. Our doctor told me there was no
chance of Mr. Manning having been killed or injured, without our
receiving notification of the fact, somehow. But I've been nervously
troubled about it, and nights I've dreamed of seeing him
somewhere,--alone and helpless,--and unable to let me know----"

"Maybe he is," said Mrs. Vail; "I knew a man once----"

But Olive cut short the tale of this acquaintance of her friend and kept
to the business in hand.

"I can't think of anything better to do," I said, "than to advertise. But
why are not other people doing this? Who are Mr. Manning's friends? Who
are his business people? Why are they silent?"

"I don't know that they are," Olive returned; "but to tell the truth, I
don't know much about Mr. Manning's affairs, in a business way. I know he
is a civil engineer, but that's about all. A consulting engineer he is,
too. As to his people, I know only his sister, and she doesn't know what
to do either. I've seen Mrs. Russell twice since, and we can only
sympathize with each other."

"Who is Mr. Russell?"

"Her husband? He's in France, and she's alone with her two little girls.
She and Amory are devoted to each other, and he was of such help and
comfort to her in her husband's absence. Now, she doesn't know which way
to turn."

"I must look these things up," I said; "I must talk with Mr. Manning's
business associates,--doubtless Mrs. Russell can tell me of them."

"Oh, yes, of course. You go to see her, and she'll be only too glad to
see you."

"And as to a detective? Shall I get in touch with Wise?"

"Yes, I think so. It does seem so queer for me to decide these things! I
can't get used to the fact that I'm my own guardian!"

"You're of age, Olive," and Mrs. Vail smiled.

"Oh, yes, and I've had entire control of my money for some time. But
Uncle always decided all matters of importance,--though, goodness knows,
there never were any such to decide as those that beset us now! Think of
my engaging a detective!"

"But Wise is so interesting and so adaptable, you'll really like him.
I'll ask him to call here with me some afternoon or evening and you can
get acquainted."

"I'd like to meet him," put in Mrs. Vail; "I knew a man once who wanted
to be a detective, but he died. I've never seen a real detective."

"Pennington Wise is a real one, all right," I declared. "Of course, Miss
Raynor, I shall tell the police that you are employing a private
detective, for I don't think it a good plan to do it secretly. It is
never wise to antagonize the police; they do all they can, popular
prejudice to the contrary notwithstanding."

"Very well, Mr. Brice," and Olive gave me a look of confidence. "I don't
care what you do, so long as you attend to it. I don't want to see those
horrid police people again."

I thought to myself that she might be obliged to do so, unless Penny Wise
could find another way to make them look. But I did not tell her so, for
nothing raised her ire like the hint of suspicion directed toward herself
in the matter of Amos Gately's murder.

"How dare they!" she exclaimed, her eyes fairly snapping with anger; "to
dream that I--Olive Raynor--could--why, it's impossible to put it into
words!"

It did seem so. To look at that dainty, lovely girl,--the very ideal of
all that is best and gentlest in human nature,--it was impossible to
breathe the word _murder_ in the same breath!

I went away from the house, when my visit was over, determined to track
down the assassin,--with the help of Penny Wise,--and thereby clear
Olive's name from the least taint of the ugly suspicion now held by the
police.


The next morning, in my office, I told Norah of all the developments of
Sunday.

The warm-hearted girl was deeply interested, and eager for me to
communicate with Wise at once, for which purpose she slipped a fresh
sheet of paper in her typewriter, and waited for my dictation of a letter
to the detective.

"Wait a minute, Norah," I laughed; "give me time to open my desk!"

But I did dispatch the letter that morning, and awaited the answer as
impatiently as Norah herself.

And then I went down to Police Headquarters.

There a surprise was given me. The Chief had received a letter that
seemed to have a decided bearing on the mystery of the murder. He handed
it to me without comment, and I read this:

  To Police Headquarters;
      New York City;
  Sirs:

Last Wednesday afternoon, I was in New York, and was in the Building of
the Puritan Trust Company. I had occasion to transact some business on
the tenth floor, and afterward, when waiting for the elevator to take me
down, I saw a pistol lying on the floor of the hallway near the elevator.
I picked it up and put it in my pocket,--undecided, at the moment,
whether to consider it "findings-keepings" (as it was a first-class one!)
or whether to turn it in at the superintendent's office. As a matter of
fact, when I reached the street floor I forgot all about the thing, nor
did I remember it until I was back in Boston. And then, I read in the
papers the accounts of the murder in that same building, that same
afternoon, and I saw it was my duty to return the pistol and acquaint you
with these facts. But alas, for dilatory human nature! I procrastinated
(without meaning to) until today, and now I send this belated word, with
an apology for my tardiness. The pistol is safe in my possession, and I
will hold it pending your advices. Shall I send it to you,--and how? Or
shall I turn it over to the Boston police? My knowledge of the whole
matter begins and ends with the finding of the pistol, which after all,
may have nothing to do with the crime. But I found it at three o'clock,
or a very few minutes after, if that interests you. I shall be here, at
The Touraine, for another week, and will cheerfully allow myself to be
interviewed at your convenience, but, as I said, I have no further
information to give than that I have here set forth.

                           Very truly yours,
                                                          Nicholas Lusk.


The letter was dated from Boston, on Saturday evening, two days before.
Truly, Friend Lusk had delayed his statement, but as he said, that was
human nature, in matters not important to oneself.

The Chief was furiously angry at the lateness of the information, and had
already dispatched a messenger to get the weapon and to interview the
Boston man.

"It's all straight on the face of it," declared Chief Martin; "only an
honest, cheerful booby would write like that! He picks up a pistol,
forgets all about it, and then, when he learns it's evidence,--or may
be,--he calmly waits forty-eight hours before he pipes up!"

"Is it _the_ pistol?" I asked, quietly.

"How do I know?" blustered Martin. "Likely it is. I don't suppose half a
dozen people sowed pistols around that building at just three o'clock
last Wednesday afternoon!"

"How do you fit it in?"

"Well, this way,--if you want to know. Miss--well, that is,--whoever
_did_ do the shooting, ran out of the third room, just as Jenny
described, and ran downstairs,--it doesn't matter whether all the way
down or not, but at least to the tenth--two floors below, and there
dropped the pistol, either by accident or by design, and proceeded to
descend, as I said, either by the stairs or by taking an elevator at some
intervening floor. Now, we want that pistol. To be sure, it may not
incriminate anybody,--and yet, there's lots of individuality in
firearms!"

"In detective stories the owner's initials are on all well-conducted
pistols," I remarked, casually.

"Not in real life, though. There's a number on them, of course, but that
seldom helps. And yet, I've got a hunch that that pistol will tell its
own story, and my fingers itch to get a hold of it!"

"When do you expect it?"

"I've sent young Scanlon after it. He's a live wire, and he'll get back
soon's anybody could. See here, this is the way I dope it out. If a woman
did the shooting, she'd be more'n likely to throw away a pistol,--or to
drop it unintentional like, in her nervousness, but a man--nixy!"

I had foreseen this. And the statement was, in a way, true. A man, having
committed murder, does not drop his pistol,--unless, and I divulged this
thought to Martin, unless he wants to throw suspicion on someone else.

"Nothin' doin'," was his curt response. "Nobody on that floor possible to
suspect, 'ceptin' it's Rodman,--and small chance of him."

"Rodman!" I cried; "why, he got on the elevator at the seventh floor,
just after the shooting."

"He did!" the Chief straightened up; "how do you know?"

"Saw him. I was going down,--in Minny's elevator, you know,--to look for
Jenny----"

"When was this?"

"About ten minutes after the shooting--and of course I got on at the
twelfth floor, and there were no other passengers at first, so I talked
to Minny. But at the seventh Rodman got on, and so we stopped talking."

"His office is on the tenth," mused Martin; "s'posin'--just s'posin'
he'd--er--he was implicated, and that he ran downstairs afterward, to his
own floor, you know,--and then, later, walked to seven, and took a car
there----"

"Purposely leaving his pistol on his own floor!"

"Shucks, no! Dropped it accidentally."

"But you said male criminals don't do that!"

"Oh, pshaw! I say lots of things,--and you would, too, if you were as
bothered as I am!"

"That's so, Chief," I agreed, "and there is certainly something to be
looked into,--I should say, without waiting for a report from Boston."

"You bet there is! I'm going to send Hudson right up there. He's as good
a sleuth as we've got, and he'll deal with the Rodman matter in a right
and proper way. If there's nothing to find out, Rodman will never know he
looked."

Hudson was duly dispatched, and I returned to the Puritan Building. It
was queer, but Rodman had been in the back of my head all along,--and
yet, I had no real reason to think him implicated. I did not know whether
he knew Mr. Gately or not, but I, too, had confidence in Foxy Jim
Hudson's discretion, and I was pretty positive he'd find out
something,--if there were anything worth finding out.

And there was!


Rodman, by good luck, was out and his offices locked. Hudson gently
persuaded the locks to let go their grip, and, for he let me go with him,
we went in.

The first thing that hit me in the eyes, was a big war map on the wall.
Moreover, though not a duplicate of Mr. Gately's map, it was similar, and
it hung in a similar position. That is, as Rodman's offices were directly
under those of the bank president, two floors below, the rooms matched,
and in the "third room" as we called it in Mr. Gately's case, Rodman also
had his map hung.

There was but one conclusion, and Hudson and I sprang to it at once.

Together, we pulled aside the map, and sure enough, there was a door
exactly like the door in Mr. Gately's room, a small, flush door, usually
hidden by the map.

"To the secret elevator, of course," I whispered to Hudson, for walls
have ears, and these walls were in many ways peculiar.

"By golly, it is!" he returned; "let's open her up!"

He forced the door open, and assured himself that it did indeed lead into
the private elevator shaft, and there were the necessary buttons to cause
it to stop, if properly used. But now, the car being down on the ground
floor, where it had stayed ever since the day of the murder, of course,
the buttons could not be manipulated.

"Now," said Hudson, his brow furrowed, "to see where else this bloomin'
rogue trap lets 'em off! There's somethin' mighty queer goin' on that we
ain't caught on to yet!"

He carefully closed the door, readjusted the map, and making sure we had
left no traces of our visit, he motioned me out and we went away.

He asked me to return to my office, and promised to see me there later.

When he returned, he told me that he had visited every other office in
the building through whose rooms the elevator shaft descended and in no
other instance was there an opening into the shaft.

"Which proves," he summed up, "that Mr. Gately and Mr. Rodman was somehow
in cahoots, else why would Rodman have access to that secret elevator?
Answer me that!"

There were several possible answers. Rodman might have taken his offices
after the elevator was built, and might never have used it at all. His
map might have hung over it merely to cover the useless door.

Or, Rodman might have been a personal friend of Mr. Gately's and used the
little car for informal visits.

Again,--though I hated myself for the thought,--Mr. Gately might have had
guests whom he didn't wish to be seen entering his rooms, and he might
have had an arrangement with Rodman whereby the visitors could go in and
out through his rooms, and take the private elevator between the tenth
and twelfth floors.

I distrusted Rodman; without any definite reason, but all the same I did
distrust him, and I have frequently found my intuitions regarding
strangers hit pretty nearly right.

It was unnecessary, however, to answer Foxy Jim's question, for he
answered it himself.

"There's something about Mr. Gately," he said, and he spoke seriously,
almost solemnly, "that hasn't come to light yet, but it's bound to. Yes,
sir, it's bound to! And it's on the way. Now, if we can hook up that
Boston pistol with Mr. George Rodman, well and good; if we can't,
Rodman's got to be put through the grill anyhow. He's in it for
keeps--that elevator door isn't easily explained away."

"Does Mr. Rodman," it was Norah who spoke, and as before, Hudson turned
to her almost expectantly--he seemed to depend on her for suggestions, or
at least, he always listened to them--"I wonder, Mr. Brice," she went on
slowly, "does Mr. Rodman look at all like the figure you saw in the
shadow?"

I thought back.

"Yes," I said, decidedly, "he does! Now, hold on, Hudson, it's only a
memory, you know, and I may easily be mistaken. But it seems to me I can
remember a real resemblance between that shadowed head and the head of
George Rodman."

"It's worth an experiment," returned the foxy detective, and on the
strength of his decision he waited in my office until George Rodman
returned to his.

I didn't know, at the time, what argument Hudson used to get Rodman to do
it, but his foxiness prevailed and, obeying orders, I found myself
watching the shadow of George Rodman's head on Amos Gately's glass door,
as Hudson engaged his suspect in animated conversation.

Of course, the scene of the crime was not re-enacted, there was merely
the shadowed picture of the two men, but Hudson managed to have Rodman
conspicuously shadowed in various positions and postures.


And after it was over, and Hudson, back in my office, asked me for my
verdict, I was obliged to say:

"Mr. Hudson, if that is not the man I saw quarreling with Mr. Gately, it
is his exact counterpart! Were it a less grave occasion, I should not
hesitate to swear that it is the same man."

"That's enough, Mr. Brice," and Foxy Jim Hudson went back to Headquarters
with his report.




                               CHAPTER X
                          Penny Wise and Zizi


And so it was at this stage of affairs that Pennington Wise got into the
game. He willingly agreed to take up the case, for the mystery of it
appealed to him strongly, and by a stroke of good luck he was not
otherwise engaged.

He had promised to call at Miss Raynor's, and as she had asked me to be
present also, I went up there, reaching the house before Wise did.

"What's he like?" Olive inquired of me.

"Good-looking sort of chap, without being handsome," I told her. "You'll
like his personality, I'm sure, whether he helps us out of our troubles
or not."

"I don't care a fig for his personality," she returned, "but I do want
him to solve our two mysteries. I suppose you'll think I'm dreadful,--but
I'd rather Mr. Wise would find Amory Manning for me, than to discover
Uncle Amos' murderer."

"I don't blame you at all for that. Of course, we want to find the
criminal, but even more, I too, want to find Mr. Manning for you."

"And, anyway, I suppose the police think now that Mr. Rodman did it."

"They don't go so far as to say that, but they're hunting up evidence,
and they've got hold of some pretty damaging information. It seems Rodman
was mixed up in some wrongdoing, and it begins to look as if Mr. Gately
was in some way connected with it,--at least, to a degree."

"If he was, then he didn't know it was wrong." Olive spoke with deep
conviction, and I didn't try to disabuse her mind.

And then Pennington Wise was announced.

As he entered the room his manner showed no trace of self-consciousness,
and as I had anticipated, Olive was greatly pleased with her first
glimpse of him. But to her surprise, and mine also, he was accompanied,
or rather followed, by a young woman, a mere slip of a girl, who paused
and stood quietly by.

As Olive smiled at her inquiringly, Wise said:

"That's Zizi. She's part of my working paraphernalia, and will just sit
and listen while we talk."

The girl was fascinating to look at. Slight of build, she had a lithe
suppleness that made her every motion a gesture of grace, and her pretty
smile was appreciative and responsive. She had black hair and very black
eyes, which sparkled and danced as she took in her surroundings. But she
said no word, acknowledging her brief introduction only by a slight bow,
and accepting the chair that Olive offered, she sat quietly, her small
gloved hands resting in her lap.

She wore a black suit with a fine set of black fox furs. Unfastening the
fur collar, she disclosed a black blouse of soft, thin material which
fell away from her slender white throat in becoming fashion.

Her manner was correct in every particular, and she sat in an
unembarrassed silence as Wise proceeded to talk.

"I know all that has been in the papers," he said, somewhat abruptly,
"now, I'd like you to tell me the rest. I can't help feeling there must
be more in the way of evidence or clews than has been made public. First
of all, do _you_ think Mr. Rodman the guilty man?"

He addressed himself mainly to Olive, though including me in his
inquiring glance.

"I'm sure I don't know," Olive returned; "I won't believe, however, that
Amos Gately was involved in any sort of wrong. His honor and integrity
were of the highest type,--I knew him intimately enough to certify to
that."

"What sort of wrongdoing is this Rodman accused of?" asked Wise.

"Nobody seems willing to tell that," I answered, as Olive shook her head.
"I've inquired of the police, and they decline to reveal just what they
do suspect him of. But I think it's something pretty serious, and they're
tracking it down as fast as they can."

"You see," Olive put in, "if Mr. Rodman is such a bad man, he may have
hoodwinked Mr. Gately and made him believe something was all right when
it was all wrong."

"Of course he might," said Wise, sympathetically. "Did people come here
to the house to see Mr. Gately on business?"

"No; never. Uncle had few visitors, but they were always just his
friends, not business callers."

"Then most of our search must be in his offices. You noticed nothing
there, Mr. Brice, that seemed indicative?"

Then I told him about the hatpin and the carriage check; and I also
related how Norah had found and kept the "powder-paper" that she picked
out of the waste basket.

Zizi's eyes flashed at this, and she said, "Has she traced it?"

It was the first time the girl had spoken, and I was charmed with her
voice. Low and soft, it had also a bell-like quality, and seemed to leave
a ringing echo in the air after she ceased speaking.

"Yes; to the shop where it was bought," I replied. "As Norah guessed, it
came from a very high-class perfumer's on Fifth Avenue. But of course he
could not tell us to whom he had sold that particular paper."

"I'd like to see it," said Zizi, simply, and again relapsed into silence.

"Norah must be a bright girl," observed Wise, "and she has made a good
start by finding the shop. Perhaps we can carry the trail further. It
wasn't yours, Miss Raynor?"

"No; I use a paler tint. This one, I have seen it, is quite a deep pink."

"Indicating a brunette possibly. Now, it's not likely it belonged to that
old Mrs. Driggs, so we must assume another woman in the office that day.
And we must discover who she is."

"There is the hatpin, you know," said Olive. "I have it here, if you care
to see it. But the police decided it meant nothing."

"Nothing means nothing," said Zizi, with a funny little smile. "Please
let us see the hatpin."

Olive took it from a desk drawer and handed it to the girl, who
immediately passed it over to Penny Wise.

He looked at it with interest, for a silent minute.

"There couldn't be a better _portrait parlé_!" he exclaimed. "This pin
belongs to a lady with dark, straight hair,--coarse, and lots of it. She
has good teeth, and she is proud of them. Her tastes incline to the
flashy, and she is fond of strong perfumes. She is of somewhat untidy
habits and given to sentiment. She is intellectual and efficient and, if
not wealthy, she has at least a competence."

"For gracious goodness sake!" gasped Olive; "and I've studied that hatpin
for hours and never could deduce a thing!"

"What I have read from it may be of no use to us," said Wise,
indifferently; "I think it will be a sufficient indication of which way
to look to find the lady in question, but that doesn't necessarily mean
the finding of her will do any good."

"But she may know something to tell us that will do good," Olive
suggested; "at any rate, let's find her. How will you go about it?"

"Why, I think it will be a good plan to ask the stenographer, Jenny Boyd,
if she ever saw anyone there who fits our description."

"She's the lady of the powder-paper, maybe," murmured Zizi, and Penny
Wise said, "Of course," in a preoccupied way, and went on:

"That Jenny person must be further grilled. She hasn't told all she
knows. She was in Mr. Gately's employ but a short time and yet she picked
up a lot of information. But she hasn't divulged it all, not by a long
shot!"

"How do you know all this?" asked Olive, wonderingly.

"I've read the papers. I have an unbreakable habit of reading between the
lines, and I think Miss Jenny has been persuaded by somebody to suppress
certain interesting bits of evidence that would fit right into our
picture puzzle."

"May I come in?" said a gentle voice, and Mrs. Vail appeared in the
doorway.

As we rose to greet her, Olive presented Mr. Wise, and then Mrs. Vail
permitted herself the luxury of a stare of genuine curiosity.

His whimsical smile charmed her, and she was most cordial of speech and
manner. Indeed, so absorbed was she in this new acquaintance that she
didn't even see Zizi, who sat, as always, back and in the shadow.

"Don't let me interrupt," said Mrs. Vail, fluttering into a chair. "Just
go on as if I were not here. I'm _so_ interested, just let me listen! I
won't say a word. Oh, Olive dear, did you show Mr. Wise the letter?"

"No; it's unimportant," replied the girl.

"But I don't think it is, my dear," Mrs. Vail persisted. "You know it
might be a--what do they call it?--a clew. Why, I knew a lady once----"

"A letter is always important," said Zizi from her corner, and Mrs. Vail
jumped and gave a startled exclamation.

"Who's that?" she cried, peering through her _lorgnon_ in the direction
of the voice.

"Show yourself, Zizi," directed Wise. "This is my assistant, Mrs. Vail.
She is in our council but not of it. I can't explain her exactly, but
you'll come to understand her."

Zizi leaned forward and gave Mrs. Vail a pleasant if indifferent smile,
then sank back to her usual obscurity.

The girl was, Wise had said, a negligible personality, and yet whenever
she spoke she said something!

Mrs. Vail looked bewildered, but apparently she was prepared to accept
anything, however strange, in connection with detective work.

"Well," she observed, "as that pretty little thing says, a letter is
always important, and I think you ought to show it, Olive. I had a letter
once that changed the whole current of my life!"

"What is this letter, Miss Raynor?" asked Wise, in a matter-of-fact way.

"One I received in this morning's mail," Olive replied; "I paid no
attention to it, because it was anonymous. Uncle Amos told me once never
to notice an anonymous letter,--always to burn and forget it."

"Good enough advice, in general," said Wise; "but in such serious matters
as we have before us any letter is of interest."

"Is the letter written by a woman, and signed 'A Friend'?" asked Zizi in
her soft voice.

"Did you write it?" cried Olive, turning to the wraith-like girl who sat
so quietly behind her.

"Oh, no, no, no! _I_ didn't write it," and the demure little face showed
a fleeting smile.

"Then how did you know? For it _is_ signed 'A Friend,' but I don't know
whether it was a woman who wrote it or not."

"It was," and Zizi nodded her sleek little black head. She had removed
her hat and placed it on a nearby chair, and as she nestled into her furs
which formed a dark background, her small white face looked more eerie
than ever. "Ninety per cent. of all anonymous letters are written by
women, and ninety per cent. of these are signed 'A Friend.' Though
usually that is a misstatement."

"May I see the letter?" asked Wise.

"Sure; I'll get it."

It was Zizi who spoke! And rising, she went swiftly across the room, to a
desk, and from a pigeonhole took an opened letter, which she carried to
Wise, and then dropped back into her seat again.

Mrs. Vail gave a surprised gasp, and Olive looked her amazement.

"How did you know where to find that?" she exclaimed, her great brown
eyes wide with wonder.

"Dead easy," said Zizi, nonchalantly; "you've scarcely taken your eyes
off that spot, Miss Raynor, since the letter was mentioned!"

"But even though I looked at the desk, how could you pick out the very
letter, at once?"

"Oh, I looked at the desk, too. And I saw your morning's mail, pretty
well sorted out. There's a pile of bills, a pile of what are unmistakably
social notes, and, up above in a pigeonhole, all by itself, was this
letter. You glanced at it a dozen times or more, so I couldn't help
knowing."

Olive laughed. One couldn't help liking the strange girl whose expression
was so earnest, even while her black eyes were dancing.

Meanwhile, Penny Wise examined the missive.

"I'll read it aloud?" and he glanced at Olive, who acquiesced by a nod.


"Miss Raynor:

"Quit looking for slayer of A.G. or you'll be railroaded in yourself.
This is straight goods. Call off all Tecs, or beware consequences. Will
not warn twice!

                                                             "A Friend."


"A woman," Pennington Wise said in a musing voice, after he read it.

"A business woman," added Zizi from her corner.

"A stenographer maybe," Wise went on, and Olive cried:

"Do you mean Jenny?"

"Oh, no; this is written by a woman with more brains than Jenny ever
dreamed of. A very clever woman in fact."

"Who?" breathed Olive, her eager face flushing in her interest and
anxious to know more.

"I don't know that, Miss Raynor, but----"

"Oh, Mr. Wise," broke in Mrs. Vail; "you are so wonderful! Won't you
explain how you do it, as you go along?"

She spoke as if he were a conjurer.

"Anything to oblige," Wise assented. "Well, here's how it looks to me.
The writer of this letter is a business woman, not only because she uses
this large, single sheet of bond paper, but because she knows how to use
it. She is a stenographer,--by that I do not necessarily mean that is her
business,--she may have a knowledge of stenography, and be in some much
more important line of work. But she is an accomplished typist and a
rapid one. This, I know, of course, from the neat and uniform typing. She
is clever, because she has used this non-committal paper, which is in no
way especial or individual. She is a business woman, again, because she
uses such expressions as 'quit,' railroaded,' 'Tecs,' 'straight
goods,'----"

"Which she might do by way of being misleading----" murmured Zizi.

"Too many of 'em, and too casually used, Ziz. A society girl trying to
pose as a business woman never would have rolled those words in so
easily. I should have said a newspaper woman but for a certain
peculiarity of style which indicates,--what, Zizi?"

"You've got it; a telegraph operator."

"Exactly. Do you know any telegrapher, Miss Raynor?"

"No, indeed!" and Olive looked astounded at the suggestion that she
should number such among her acquaintances. "Are you sure?"

"Looks mighty like it. The short sentences and the elimination of
personal pronouns seem to me to denote a telegraph girl's diction. And
she is very clever! She has sent the carbon copy of the letter and not
the outside typing."

"Why?" I asked.

"To make it less traceable. You know, typewriting is very nearly as
individual as pen-writing. The differentiations of the machine as well as
of the user's technique, are almost invariably so pronounced as to make
the writing recognizable. Now these peculiarities, while often clear on
the first paper, are blurred more or less on the carbon copy. So 'A
Friend,' thinking to be very canny, has sent the carbon. This is a new
trick, though I've seen it done several times of late. But it isn't so
misleading as it is thought to be. For all the individual peculiarities
of the typewriter,--I mean, the machine, are almost as visible on this as
on the other. I've noticed them in this case, easily. And moreover, this
would-be clever writer has overreached herself! For a carbon copy smudges
so easily that it is almost impossible to touch it, even to fold the
sheet, without leaving a telltale thumb or finger print! And this
correspondent has most obligingly done so!"

"Really!" breathed Zizi, with a note of satisfaction in her low voice.

"And the peculiarities,--what are they?" asked Olive.

"The one that jumps out and hits me first is the elevated _s_. Look,--and
you have to look closely, Miss Raynor,--in every instance the letter _s_
is a tiny speck higher than the other letters."

"Why, so it is," and Olive examined the letter with deep interest; "but
how can you find a machine with an elevated _s_?"

"It isn't a sign-board, it's a proof. When we think we have the right
machine, the _s_ will prove it,--not lead us to it."

"Let me see," begged Mrs. Vail, reaching for the paper. "A friend of mine
is a stenographer; maybe she----"

"Excuse me," and Penny Wise folded the letter most carefully. "We can't
get any more finger prints on this paper, or we shall render it useless.
Now, Miss Raynor, I'm going. I'll take the letter, and I've little doubt
it will be a great help to me in my work. I will report to you from time
to time, but it may be a few days before I learn anything of importance.
Zizi?"

"Yes; I'll stay here," and the girl sat quietly in her chair.

"That means she'll take up her abode with you for the present, Miss
Raynor," and Wise smiled at Olive.

"Live here?"

"Yes, please. It is necessary, or she wouldn't do it."

"Oh, let her stay!" cried Mrs. Vail; "she's so interesting--and queer!"

The object of her comment gave her an engaging smile, but said nothing,
and beckoning me to go with him, Wise rose to take leave.

But I wanted to have a little further talk with Olive on several matters
and I told Wise I'd join him a little later.

"Be goody-girl, Zizi," he adjured as he went off, and she nodded her
head, but with a saucy grimace at the detective.

"My room?" she said, inquiringly, with a pretty, shy glance at Olive.
"I'm no trouble,--not a bit. Any little old room, you know."

"You shall have it in a few moments," and Olive went away to see the
housemaids about it.

Mrs. Vail snatched at a chance to talk uninterruptedly to the strange
girl.

"What is your work?" she inquired; "do you help Mr. Wise? Isn't he
wonderful! How you must admire him. I knew a detective once,--or, at
least, a man who was going to be a detective, but---- Oh, _do_ tell me
what your part of the work is!"

"I sit by," returned Zizi, with a dear little grin that took off all edge
of curtness.

"Sit by! Is that some technical term? I don't quite understand."

"I don't always understand myself," and the girl shook her head slowly;
"but I just remain silent until Mr. Wise wants me to speak,--to tell him
something, you know. Then I tell him."

"But how do _you_ know it?" I put in, fascinated by this strange child,
for she looked little more than a child.

"Ooh!" Zizi shuddered, and drew her small self together, her black eyes
round and uncanny-looking; "ooh! I donno how I know! I guess the bogie
man tells me!"

Mrs. Vail shuddered too, and gave a little shriek.

"You're a witch," she cried; "own up, now, aren't you a witch?"

"Yes, lady, lady! I _am_ a witch,--a poor little witch girl!" and Zizi
laughed outright at her own little joke.

If her smile had been charming, her laugh was more so. It was not only of
a silvery trill, but it was infectious, and Mrs. Vail and I laughed in
sympathy.

"What are you all laughing at?" said Olive, reappearing.

"At me," and Zizi spoke humbly now; "I made 'em laugh. Sorry!"

"Come along with me, you funny child," and Olive led her away, leaving me
to be the victim of Mrs. Vail's incessant stream of chatter.

The good lady volubly discussed the detective and his assistant and
detailed many accounts of people she had known. Her acquaintance was
seemingly a wide one!

At last Olive returned, smiling.

"I never saw anything like her!" she exclaimed; "I gave her a pretty
little room, not far from mine. I don't know, I'm sure, why she's staying
here, but I like to have her. Well, in about two minutes she had the
furniture all changed about. Not the heavy pieces, of course, but she
moved a small table and all the chairs, and finally unscrewed an electric
light bulb from one place and put it on another, and then, after looking
all about, she said, 'Just one thing more!' and if she didn't spring up
on to a table with one jump and take down quite a large picture! 'There,'
she said, and she set it out in the hall; 'I can't bear that thing! Now
this is a lovely room, and I thank you, Miss Raynor. The pink one we
passed is yours, isn't it?'

"'Yes; how did you know?' I asked her. And she said, 'I saw a photograph
of Mr. Manning on your bureau.' Little rascal! I can't help liking her!"




                               CHAPTER XI
                              Case Rivers


So absorbed was I in the new interests that had come into my life, so
anxious to be of assistance to Olive Raynor, and so curious to watch the
procedure of Pennington Wise, that I confess I forgot all about the poor
chap I had seen at Bellevue Hospital,--the man who "fell through the
earth"! And I'm not sure I should ever have thought of him again, save as
a fleeting memory, if I hadn't received a letter from him.

  My dear Brice [he wrote]: I've no right to pilfer your time, but if you
  have a few minutes to squander, I wish you'd give them to me. I'm about
  to be discharged from the hospital, with a clean bill of health,--but
  with no hint or clew as to my cherished identity. The doctors--drat
  'em!--say that some day my memory will spring, full-armed, back at me,
  but meanwhile, I must just sit tight and wait. Not being of a patient
  disposition, I'm going to get busy at acquiring a new identity, then,
  if the old one ever does spring a come-back, I'll have two,--and can
  lead a double life! No, I'm not flippant, I'm philosophical. Well, if
  your offer didn't have a string tied to it come in to see me,--please.

                               Sincerely yours,
                                                            Case Rivers.

  P.S.--The doctors look upon me as a very important and interesting
  case,--hence my name.

I smiled at the note, and as I had taken a liking to the man from the
start, I went at once to see him.

"No," I assured him, after receiving his cordial welcome, "my offer had
no string attached. I'm more than ready to help in any way I can, to find
a niche for you in this old town and fit you into it. It doesn't matter
where you hail from, or how you got here; New York is an all-comers'
race, and the devil take the hindmost."

"He won't get me, then," and Rivers nodded his head determinedly; "I may
not be in the van, just at first, but give me half a chance, and I'll
make good!"

This was not bumptiousness or braggadocio, I could see, but an earnest
determination. The man was sincere and he had a certain doggedness of
purpose, which was evident in his looks and manner as well as in his
words.

Rivers was up and dressed now, and I saw he was a good-looking chap. His
light-brown hair was carefully parted and brushed; his smooth-shaven face
was thin and pale, but showed strong lines of character. He had been
fitted with glasses,--a _pince-nez_, held by a tiny gold chain over one
ear,--and this corrected the vacant look in his eyes. His clothes were
inexpensive and quite unmistakably ready-made.

He was apologetic. "I'd rather have better duds," he said, "but as I had
to borrow money to clothe myself at all, I didn't want to splurge. One
doctor here is a brick! He's going to follow up my 'case,' and so I
accepted his loan. It's a fearful predicament to be a live, grown-up man,
without a cent to your name!"

"Let me be your banker," I offered, in all sincerity; "I----"

"No; I don't want coin so much as I want a way to earn some. Now, if
you'll put me in the way of getting work,--anything that pays pretty
well,--I'll be obliged, sir, and I'll be on my way."

His smile was of that frank, chummy sort that makes for sympathy and I
agreed to help him in any way I could think of.

"What can you do?" I asked, preliminarily.

"Dunno. Have to investigate myself, and learn what are my latent talents.
Doubtless their name is legion. But I've nailed one of them. I can draw!
Witness these masterpieces!"

He held up some sheets of scribble paper on which I saw several careful
and well-done mechanical drawings.

"You were a draughtsman!" I exclaimed, "in that lost life of yours."

"I don't know. I may have been. Anyway, these things are all right."

"What are they?"

"Not much of anything. They're sort of designs for wall-paper or
oilcloth. See? Merely suggestions, you know, but this one, repeated,
would make a ripping study for a two-toned paper."

"You're right," I exclaimed, in admiration of the pattern. "You must have
been a designer of such things."

"No matter what I _was_,--the thing is what can I be now, to take my
place in the economic world. These are, do you see, adaptations from snow
crystals."

"So they are! It takes me back to my school days."

"Perhaps I'm harking back to those, too. I remember the pictures of snow
crystals in 'Steele's Fourteen Weeks in Natural Science.' Did you study
that?"

"I did!" I replied, grinning; "in high school! But, is your memory
returning?"

"Not so's you'd notice it! I have recollection of all I learned in an
educational way, but I can't see any individual picture of _me_,
personally,--oh, never mind! How can I get a position as master designer
in some great factory?"

"That's a big order," I laughed. "But you can begin in a small way and
rise to a proud eminence----"

"No, thanky! I'm not as young as I once was,--my favorite doctor puts me
down at thirty,--plus or minus,--but I feel about sixty."

"Really, Rivers, do you feel like an old man?"

"Not physically,--that's the queer part. But I feel as if my life was all
behind me----"

"Oh, that's because of your temporary mental----"

"I know it. And I'm going to conquer it,--or get around it some way. Now,
if you'll introduce me,--and, yes, act as my guarantee, my reference,--I
know it's asking a lot, but if you'll do that, I'll make good, I promise
you!"

"I believe you will, and I'm only too glad to do it. I'll take you,
whenever you say, around to a firm I know of, that I believe will be
jolly glad to get you. You see, so many men of your gifts have gone to
war----"

"Yes, I know, and I'd like to enlist myself, but Doc says I can't, being
a--a defective."

"I wish you were a detective instead," I said, partly to turn the current
of his thoughts from his condition and partly because my mind was so full
of my own interests that he was a secondary consideration.

"I'd like to be. I've been reading a bunch of detective stories since
I've been here in hospital, and I don't see as that deduction business is
such a great stunt. Sherlock Holmes is all right, but most of his
imitators are stuff and nonsense."

And then, unable to hold it back any longer, I told him all about the
Gately case and about Pennington Wise.

He was deeply interested, and his eyes sparkled when I related Wise's
deductions from the hatpin.

"Has he proved it yet?" he asked; "have you checked him up?"

"No, but there hasn't been time. He's only just started his work. He has
another task; to find Amory Manning."

"Who's he?"

"A man who has disappeared, and there is fear of foul play."

"Is he suspected of killing Gately?"

"Oh, no, not that; but he was suspected of hiding to shield Miss
Raynor----"

"Pshaw! a girl wouldn't commit a murder like that."

"I don't think this girl did, anyway. And, in fact, they--the police I
mean--have a new suspect. There's a man named Rodman, who is being looked
up."

"Oh, it's all a great game! I wish I could get out into the world and
take part in such things!"

"You will, old man. Once you're fairly started, the world will be----"

"My cellar-door! You bet it will! I'm going to slide right down it."

"What about your falling through it? Do you remember any more details of
that somewhat--er--unusual performance?"

"Yes, I do! And you can laugh all you like. That's no hallucination, it's
a clear, true memory,--the only memory I have."

"Just what do you remember?"

"That journey through the earth----"

"You been reading Jules Verne lately?"

"Never read it. But that long journey down, down,--miles and miles,--I
can never forget it! I've had a globe to look at, and I suppose I must
have started thousands of miles from here----"

"Oh, now, come off----"

"Well, it's no use. I can't make anybody believe it, but it's the truth!"

"Write it up for the movies. The Man Who Fell Through the Earth would be
a stunning title!"

"Now you're guying me again. Guess I'll shut up on that subject. But I'll
stick you for one more helping-hand act. Where can I get a room to live
in for a short time?"

"Why a short time?"

"Because I must take a dinky little cheap place at first, then soon, I'll
be on my feet, financially speaking, and I can move to decenter quarters.
You see, I'm going to ask you after all to trust me with a few shekels,
right now, and I'll return the loan, with interest, at no far distant
date."

His calm assumption of success in a business way impressed me favorably.
Undoubtedly, he had been one accustomed to making and spending money in
his previous life, and he took it as a matter of course. But his common
sense, which had by no means deserted him, made him aware that he could
get no satisfactory position without some sort of credentials.

As he talked he was idly, it seemed, unconsciously, drawing on the paper
pad that lay on the table at his elbow--delicate penciled marks that
resolved themselves into six-sided figures, whose radii blossomed out
into beautiful tendrils or spikes until they formed a perfect, harmonious
whole; each section alike, just as in a snow crystal.

They were so exquisitely done that I marveled at his peculiar gift.

"You ought to design lace," I observed; "those designs are too fine for
papers or carpets."

"Perhaps so," he returned, seriously gazing at his drawings. "Anyway,
I'll design something,--and it'll be something worthwhile!"

"Maybe you were an engraver," I hazarded, "before you----"

"Before I fell through the earth? Maybe I was. Well, then, suppose
tomorrow I so far encroach on your good offices as to go with you to see
the firm you mentioned. Or, if you'll give me a letter of
introduction----"

"Do you know your way around New York?"

"I'm not sure. I have a feeling I was in New York once,--a long time ago,
but I can't say for certain."

"I'll go with you then. I'll call for you tomorrow, and escort you to the
office I have in mind, and also, look up a home and fireside that appeals
to you."

"The sort that appeals to me is out of the question at present," he said,
firmly determined to put himself under no greater obligation to me than
need be. "I'll choose a room like the old gentleman in the Bible had with
a bed and a table and a stool and a candlestick."

"You remember your literature all right."

"I do, mostly; though I'll confess I read of that ascetic individual
since I've been here. The hospital is long on Bibles and detective
stories, and short on _belles-lettres_. Well, so long, old man!"

I went away, pondering. It was a strange case, this of Case Rivers. I
smiled at the name he had chosen.

He was positively a well-educated and well-read man. His speech gave me a
slight impression of an Englishman, and I wondered if he might be
Canadian. Of course, I didn't believe an atom of his yarn about coming
from Canada to our fair city _via_ the interior of the globe,--but he may
have had a lapse of memory that included his railroad journey, and
dreamed that he came in some fantastic way.

And then, as is usual, when leaving one scene for another, my thoughts
flew ahead to my next errand, which was a visit to Police Headquarters.

Here Chief Martin gave me a lot of new information. It seemed they had
unearthed damaging evidence in the case of George Rodman, and he was,
without a doubt, a malefactor,--but in what particular branch of evil the
Chief omitted to state. Nor could any rather broad hints produce any
result. At last I said:

"Why don't you arrest Rodman, then?"

"Not enough definite evidence. I'm just about sure that he killed Gately,
and I think I know why, but I can't prove it,--yet. Your statement that
his head shadowed on that glass door was the same head you saw the day of
the murder, is our strongest point----"

"Oh, I didn't say that!" I cried, aghast; "I do say it looked like the
same head, but I wouldn't swear that it was!"

"Well, I think it was, and though we can't connect up the pistol with
Rodman----"

"Did you get the pistol from the Boston man?"

"Yes; Scanlon brought home that bacon. But careful grilling failed to get
any more information from Lusk, the man who found the pistol. He tells a
straight tale of his visit to the Puritan Building, and his business
there, all corroborated by the people he called on. He found that pistol,
just as he says he did. And, of course, I knew he told the truth in his
letter. If he were involved, or had any guilty knowledge of the crime, he
surely wouldn't write to tell us of it! So now we have the pistol, and we
know it was picked up in the tenth floor hall near Rodman's door,--but
that proves nothing, since we can't claim it is Rodman's weapon. It may
be, of course, but there's nothing to show it."

"What does Rodman say for himself?"

"Denies everything. Says he had the merest nodding acquaintance with
Gately,--this we know is a lie!--says he knew there was an elevator door
in his room, but he had never used it, nor even opened it. Said he hung a
big war map over it because it was a good place for a map. We've no
living witness to give a shred of evidence against Rodman, except your
statement about his shadow,--and that is uncertain at best."

"Yes, it is. I do say it looked like Rodman's head,--that is, I mean,
Rodman's head looked like the one I saw that day. But other heads might
look as much like it."

"That's the trouble. George Rodman is a slick chap, and what he does that
he doesn't want known, doesn't get known! But I'm onto him! And I'll bet
I'll get him yet. He's so comfoundedly cool that all I say to him rolls
off like water off a duck's back. He knows I've got no proof, and he's
banking on that to get through."

"What about Jenny? Can't she tell you anything?"

"She knows nothing about Rodman. And that very point proves that if he
visited Gately often, as I think he did, he came and went by that private
elevator which connected their two offices, as well as made a street exit
for either or both of them."

"Did old man Boyd ever see Rodman leave the Matteawan by way of that
elevator?"

"He says he never did, but sometimes I think Rodman has fixed him."

"And Jenny, too, maybe."

"Maybe. And here's another thing. There's somebody called 'The Link,' who
figures largely in the whole affair, but figures secretly. I won't say
how I found this little joker, but if I can dig up who 'The Link' is,
I've made a great stride toward success."

Naturally, I said nothing about Pennington Wise to the Chief of Police,
but I made a mental note of "The Link" to report to the detective.

"Reward's offered," we were suddenly informed, as Foxy Jim Hudson burst
into the room.

"For what?" asked the Chief, a little absent-mindedly.

"For information leading to the whereabouts of Amory Manning."

Martin wheeled round in his chair to look at his subordinate. "Who
offered it? How much?"

"That's the queer part, Chief. Not the amount,--that's five thousand
dollars, but it's a person or persons unknown who will put up the kale.
It's done through the firm of Kellogg and Kellogg,--about the whitest
bunch of lawyers in town. I mean whoever offers that reward is somebody
worthwhile. No shyster business. I'm for it,--the money, I mean. Do you
know, Chief, the disappearance of that Manning chap is in some way
connected with the Gately murder? I've got a hunch on that. And here's
how I dope it out. Manning saw Rodman,--well, perhaps he didn't see him
shoot, but he saw something that incriminated Rodman, and so he,--Rodman,
had to get Manning out of the way. And did! You see, Friend Rodman is not
only a deep-dyed scoundrel,--but the dye was 'made in Germany'!"

"Well, I'm glad the reward is offered," commented the Chief. "Now some
rank outsider'll pipe up and speak his little piece."

"Meaning anybody in particular?" I asked.

With that peculiarly irritating trick of his, Chief Martin not only made
no reply but gave no evidence of having heard my question. He went on:

"That makes two rewards. The Puritan Trust Company has offered five
thousand for the apprehension of Gately's murderer. This other five
thousand adds to the excitement and ought to produce a good result."

"I'm out for both," announced Hudson. "Can't say I expect to get 'em, but
I'll make a fierce stab at it. Rodman has an awful big income, and no
visible means of support. That fact ought to help."

"How?" I asked.

"Oh, it proves to my mind that he was mixed up in lucrative business that
he didn't--well--advertise. 'The Link' was mixed in, too. That is,--I
suppose,--'The Link' was a sort of go-between, who enabled Rodman to
transact his nefarious deals secretly."

"Well, Foxy, you know a lot," and the Chief laughed good-humoredly.

I felt that I now knew a lot, too, and as I went away I determined to see
Penny Wise at once, and report all I had learned. I dropped in first at
my own office, and found Norah in a brown study, her hands behind her
head and a half-written letter in her typewriter.

She gazed at me absently, and then, noting my air of excitement, she
became alert and exclaimed, "What's happened? What do you know new?"

"Heaps," I vouchsafed, and then I told her, briefly, of Rodman's probable
guilt and also of the offered rewards.

"Jenny's your trump card," she said after a thoughtful silence. "That
girl knows a good deal that she hasn't told. I shouldn't be surprised if
she's in Rodman's employ."

"What do you mean?"

"Oh, she's too glib. She admits so many things that she has seen or heard
and then when you ask her about others, she is a blank wall. Now, she
does know about them, but she won't tell. Why? Because she's paid not
to."

"Then how can we get around her?"

"Pay her more." And Norah returned to her typing. But she looked up again
to say: "Mrs. Russell called here about an hour ago."

"She did! What for?"

"I don't know. She wanted to see you. She was a bit forlorn, so I talked
to her a little."

"I'm glad you did. Poor lady, she feels her brother's absence terribly."

"Yes; we discussed it. She thinks he has been killed."

"Has she any reason to think that?"

"No, except that she dreamed it."

"A most natural dream for a nervous, worried woman."

"Of course. I wonder if she knows there's a reward offered for Mr.
Manning?"

"Maybe she offered it,--through the Kellogg people."

"No, she didn't."

"Pray, how do you know, oh, modern Cassandra?"

"I don't know your old friend Cassandra, but I do know Mrs. Russell isn't
offering any five thousand dollars. She can't afford it."

"Why, she's a rich woman."

"She passes for one, and, of course, she isn't suffering for food or
clothes. But she is economizing. She was wearing her last year's hat and
muff, and she maids herself."

"Perhaps she wore her old clothes because she was merely out to call on
my unworthy self."

"No. She was on her way to a reception. They're her best clothes now. And
a tiny rip in one glove and a missing snap-fastener on her bodice proves
she keeps no personal lady's maid, as people in her position usually do.
So, I'm sure she isn't offering big reward money, though she loves her
brother."

"You're a born detectivess, Norah. You'll beat Penny Wise at his own
game, if he doesn't watch out!"

"Maybe," said Norah, and she laid her fingertips gracefully back on her
typewriter keys.




                              CHAPTER XII
                                The Link


It was the next afternoon that Penny Wise came into my office. It was his
first visit there, and I gave him a hearty welcome. Norah looked so
eagerly expectant that I introduced him to her, for I couldn't bear to
disappoint the girl by ignoring her.

Wise was delightfully cordial toward her, and indeed Norah's winsome
personality always made people friendly.

I had tried to get in touch with the detective the day before but he was
out on various errands, and I missed him here and there, nor could we get
together until he found this leisure.

I told him all I had learned from the police, but part of it was already
known to him. He was greatly interested in the news which he had not
heard before, that there was somebody implicated, who was called "The
Link."

"That's the one we want!" he cried; "I suspected some such person."

"Man or woman?" asked Norah, briefly, and Wise glanced at her.

"Which do you think?"

"Woman," she replied, and Penny Wise nodded his head. "Yes, I've no doubt
'The Link' is a woman, and a mighty important factor in the case."

"But I don't understand," I put in. "What does she link?"

"Whom,--not what," said Wise, and he looked very serious. "Of course, you
must realize, Brice, there's a great big motive behind this Gately
murder, and there's also a big reason for Amory Manning's disappearance.
The two are connected,--there's no doubt of that,--but that doesn't argue
Manning the murderer, of course. No, this Link is a woman of parts,--a
woman who is of highest value to the principals in this crime, and who
must be found, and that at once!"

"Did she have to do with Mr. Gately?" asked Norah, her gray eyes burning
with interest.

"I--don't--know." Wise's hesitating answer was by no means because of
disinclination to admit his ignorance, but because he was thinking deeply
himself. "Look here, Brice, can't we go over Gately's rooms now? I don't
want to ask permission of the police, but if the Trust Company people
would let us in----"

"Of course," I responded, and I went at once to the vice-president for
the desired permission.

"It's all right," I announced, returning with the keys, "come ahead."

We went into the beautiful rooms of the late bank president.

Pennington Wise was impressed with their rich and harmonious effects, and
his quick eyes darted here and there, taking in details. With marvelous
swiftness he went through the three rooms of the suite nodding his head
as he noted the special points of which he had been told. In the third
room,--the Blue Room,--he glanced about, raised the map from the wall,
and dropped it back in place, opened the door to the hall, and closed it
again, and then turned back to the middle room, the office of Amos
Gately, and apparently, to the detective's mind, the principal place of
interest.

He sat down in the fine big swivel-chair, whose velvet cushioning
deprived it of all look of an ordinary desk-chair, and mused deeply as
his eyes fairly devoured the desk fittings. Nothing had been disturbed,
that I noticed, except that the telephone had been set up in its right
position, and also the chair which I had found overturned was righted.

Wise fingered only a few things. He picked up the penholder, a thick
magnificent affair made of gold.

"Probably a gift from his clerks," said I, smiling at the ornate and
ostentatious looking thing. "All the other gimcracks are in better
taste."

Pennington Wise opened the desk drawers. There was little to see, for all
financial papers had been taken away by Mr. Gately's executors.

"Here's a queer bunch," Wise observed, as he picked up a packet of papers
held together by a rubber band. He sorted them out on the desk.

They were sheets of paper of various styles, each bearing the address or
escutcheon of some big city hotel. Many of the principal hostelries of
New York were represented among them. Each sheet bore a date stamped on
it with an ordinary rubber dating-stamp.

"Important, if true," commented Wise.

"If what's true?" asked Norah, bluntly.

"My deductions," he returned. "These letters, if we can call them
letters, doubtless were sent to Mr. Gately at separate times and in
separate envelopes."

"They were," I informed him. "One came the morning after his death."

"It did! Which one?"

"It isn't here. All the new mail went to his lawyer."

"We must get hold of it!"

"But,--do tell me what's the import of a blank sheet of paper?"

"These aren't blank," and he pointed to the stamped dates. "They are very
far from blank!"

"Only a date,--on a plain sheet of paper,--what does that mean?"

"Perhaps nothing--perhaps everything."

It wasn't like Penny Wise to be cryptic, and I gathered that the papers
were really of value as evidence. "Has the writing been erased?" I
hazarded.

"Probably not. No. I don't think so." He scrutinized more closely.

"No," he concluded, "nothing like that. The message is all told on the
surface, and he who runs may read."

"Read, 'The Waldorf-Astoria, December 7.'" I scoffed. "And is the reader
greatly enlightened?"

"Not yet, but soon," Wise murmured, as he kept up his investigation.
"Ha!" he went on, "as the actor hath it,--what have we here!"

He was now scrutinizing the ends of two burnt cigarettes, left on the
ash-tray of the smoking-set.

"The lady has left her initials! How kind of her!"

"Why, Hudson studied those and couldn't make out any letters," I
exclaimed.

"Blind Hudson! These very dainty and expensive cigarettes belonged to a
fair one, whose name began with K and S,--or S and K. Be careful how you
touch it, but surely you can see that the tops of the letters though
scorched, show definitely enough to know they must be K and S."

"They are!" cried Norah; "I can see it now."

"Couldn't that S be an O?" I caviled.

"Nope," and Wise shook his head. "The two, though both nearly burnt away,
show for sure that the letters are K and S. Here's a find! Does Miss
Raynor smoke?"

"I don't think so," I replied. "I've never seen her do so,--and she
doesn't seem that type. And then,--the initials----"

"Oh, well, she might have had some of her friends' cigarettes with her. I
was only thinking it must have been a pretty intimate caller who would
sit here and smoke with Mr. Gately--here are his own cigar stubs you see
and of course, Miss Raynor came into my mind. Eliminating her we have,
maybe, the lady of the hatpin."

"And the powder-paper!" cried Norah.

"Yes, they all seem to point to a very friendly caller, who smoked, who
took off her hat, and who powdered her nose, all in this room, and all on
the day Mr. Gately was killed. For, of course, the whole place was
cleaned and put in order every day."

"And there was the carriage check," I mused; "perhaps she left that."

"Carriage check?" asked Wise.

"Yes, a card like a piece of Swiss cheese,--you know those perforated
carriage-call checks?"

"I do. Where is it?"

"Hudson took it. But he won't get anything out of it, and you might."

"Perhaps. I must see it, anyway. Also, I want to see Jenny,--the young
stenographer who was----"

"Shall I get her here?" offered Norah.

"Yes," Wise began, but I cut him short.

"I've got to go home," I said. "I promised Rivers I'd see him this
afternoon, and take him on some errands. Suppose I go now, and you go
with me, Mr. Wise, and suppose Norah gets Jenny and brings her round to
my rooms. We can have the interview there; Rivers may not come till
later, but I must be there to receive him."

So Penny Wise and I went down to my pleasant vine and figtree, and as we
went, I told him about Case Rivers.

He was interested at once, as he always was in anything mysterious, and
he said, "I'm glad to see him. What a strange case! Can he be the missing
Manning?"

"Not a chance," I replied. "The two men are totally dissimilar in looks
and in build. Manning is heavy,--almost stocky. Rivers is gaunt and lean.
Also, Manning is dark-haired and full-blooded, while Rivers is pale and
has very light hair. I tried to make out a resemblance, but it can't be
done. However, Case Rivers is interesting on his own account;" and I told
him the story of his journey through the earth.

He laughed. "Hallucination, of course," he said; "but it might easily
lead to the discovery of his identity. That amnesic-aphasia business
always fascinates me. That is, if I'm convinced it's the real thing. For,
you know, it's a fine opportunity to fake loss of memory."

"There's no fake in this case, I'm positive," I hastened to assure him;
"I've taken a decided liking to Rivers, and I mean to keep in touch with
him, for when he regains his memory I want to know about it."

"Pulled out of the river, you say?"

"Yes, a tugboat picked him up, drowned and frozen, it was supposed. He
was taken to the morgue, and bless you, if he didn't show signs of life
when he thawed out a little. So they went to work on him and revived him
and sent him over to Bellevue where he became a celebrated case."

"I should think so. No clothes or any identification?"

"Not a rag. Or rather only a few rags of underwear,--but nothing that was
the slightest clew."

"What became of his clothes?"

"Nobody knows. He was found drifting, unconscious, apparently dead, and
entirely nude save the fragments of underclothing."

"Those fragments have been kept?"

"Oh, yes; but they mean nothing. Just ordinary material,--good,--but
nothing individual about them."

"Where was he picked up?"

"I don't know exactly, but not far from the morgue, I believe. It was the
same day as the Gately murder, that's why I remember the date. It was a
dreadfully cold snap, the river was full of ice and it's a wonder he
wasn't killed, as well as knocked senseless."

"Was he knocked senseless?"

"I'm not sure, but he was unconscious from cold and exposure and very
nearly frozen to death."

"And his memory now?"

"Is perfect in all respects, except he doesn't know who he is."

"A fishy tale!"

"No; you won't say so after you've seen him. When I say his memory is
perfect, I mean regarding what he has read or has studied. But it is his
personal recollections that have gone from him. He has no remembrance of
his home or his friends or his own identity."

"Can't you deduce his previous occupation?"

"I can't. Perhaps you can. He can draw, and he is well-read, that's all I
know."

We were at my rooms by that time, and going up, we found Case Rivers
already there awaiting us. I lamented my lack of promptness, but he
gracefully waived my apology.

"It's all right," he smiled in his good-humored way, "I've been browsing
among your books and having the time of my life."

I introduced the two men, and told Rivers that Wise was the famous
detective I had mentioned to him.

"I'm downright glad to know you," Rivers said, earnestly; "if you can do
a bit of deduction as to who I am, I'll be under deepest obligation. I
give you myself as a clew."

"Got a picture of Amory Manning?" asked Wise, abruptly.

I handed him a folded newspaper, whose front page bore a cut of Manning,
and the story of his mysterious disappearance.

Wise studied the picture and compared it with the man before him.

"Totally unlike," he said, disappointedly.

"Not a chance," laughed Rivers; "I wish I could step into that chap's
shoes; but you see, I came from far away."

"Tell me about that trip of yours," asked Wise.

"Don't know much to tell," returned Rivers; "but what I do know, I know
positively, so I'll warn you beforehand not to chuckle at me, for I won't
stand it!"

Rivers showed a determination that I liked. It proved that I was right in
ascribing a strong character to him. He would stand chaffing as well as
anyone I knew, but not on the subject of his fall through the earth.

"I don't know when or where I started on my memorable journey, but I
distinctly remember my long, dark fall straight down through the earth.
Now it would seem impossible, but I can aver that I entered in some very
cold, arctic sort of country, and I came on down feet first, till I made
exit in New York. I was found, but how I got into the river, I don't
know."

"You were clothed when you started?"

"I can only say that I assume I was. I'm a normal, decent sort of man,
and I can't think I'd consciously set out on a trip of any sort
undressed! But I've no doubt my swashing around in the ice-filled river
did for my clothes. Probably, as related by the Ancient Mariner, 'the ice
was here, the ice was there, the ice was all around: it cracked and
growled and--something or other--and howled, like noises in a swound.'
You see, I still know my 'Familiar Quotations' by heart."

"That's a queer phase," and Wise shook his head. "It may be you are a
poet----"

"Well, I haven't poetized any since my recrudescence."

"And that's another queer thing," pursued the detective. "Most victims of
aphasia can't remember words. You are exceptionally fluent and seem to
have a wide vocabulary."

"I admit it all," and Rivers looked a little weary, as if he were tired
of speculating on his own case.

"Now, to change the subject, how are you progressing, Mr. Wise, with your
present work? How goes the stalking of the murderer?"

"Haven't got him yet, Mr. Rivers, but we've made a good start. You know
the details?"

"Only the newspaper accounts, and such additional information as Mr.
Brice has given me. I'm greatly interested,--for,--tell it not to Gath
detectives,--I fancy I've a bent toward sleuthing myself."

Pennington Wise smiled. "You're not alone in that," he said, chaffingly,
but so good-naturedly that Rivers took no offense.

"I suppose it's your reflected light that makes everybody who talks with
you feel that way," he came back. "Well, if you get up a stump, lean on
me, Grandpa,--I'm 'most seven."

And then we all three discussed the case, in all its phases, and though
Rivers said nothing of great importance, he showed such an intellectual
grasp of it all, and responded so intelligently to Wise's theories and
opinions that the two soon became most friendly.

The announcement of the rewards stirred Rivers to enthusiasm.

"I'm going to get 'em!" he cried; "both of 'em! With all due respect to
you, Mr. Wise, I'm going to cut under and win out! Don't say I didn't
warn you, and hereafter all you say will be used against you! If there's
one thing I need more than another it's ten thousand dollars,--I could
even do with twenty! So, here goes for Rivers, the swiftsure detective!"

Not a bit offended, Penny Wise laughed outright.

"Go ahead, my boy," he cried; "here's a bargain; you work with me, and
I'll work with you. If we get either Manning or the murderer or both,
then either or both rewards shall be yours. I'll be content with what
else I can get out of it."

"Done!" and Case Rivers was jubilant. "Perhaps Manning is the murderer,"
he said, thoughtfully.

"No," I put in. "That won't do. Manning is in love with Miss Raynor, and
he wouldn't queer his cause by killing her guardian."

"But Guardy didn't approve of Suitor Manning," Rivers said.

"No; but I know Manning and you don't,--well, that is, I know him only
slightly. But I'm sure he's not the man to shoot a financial magnate and
a first-class citizen just because he frowned on his suit. Try again,
Rivers."

"All right: what you say goes. But I'm just starting in, you know. And,
by the way, I'm to get a job of some sort today--yes?"

He looked at me inquiringly, but Wise answered. "Wait a bit, Rivers, as
to that. If you'll agree, I'll grubstake you for a fortnight or so, and
you can help me. Really, I mean it, for as a stranger you can go to
places, and see people, where I can't show my familiar face. Then, when
you get the two rewards you can repay me my investment in you. And if you
fail to nail the ten thousand, I'll take your note."

"I'll go you!" said Rivers, after a moment's thought. "You're a brick,
Penny Wise!"

A tap at the door announced Norah, and with her came Jenny Boyd. Nor was
Jenny dragged unwillingly,--she seemed eager to enter,--but her absurd
little painted face wore a look of stubbornness and her red lips were
shut in a determined pout.

"Jenny knows who 'The Link' is, and she won't tell," Norah declared, as a
first bit of information.

"Oh, yes, she will," and Penny Wise winked at the girl. He really gave a
very knowing wink, as who should say: "We understand each other."

As they had never met before, I watched to see just how Jenny would take
it, and to my surprise she looked decidedly frightened.

Wise saw this too,--doubtless he brought about the effect purposely,--but
in a moment Jenny regained her poise and was her saucy self again.

"I don't know for sure," she said, "and so I don't want to get nobody
into trouble by suspicioning them."

"You won't get anybody into trouble," Wise assured her, "unless she has
made the trouble for herself. Let's play a game, Jenny,--let's talk in
riddles."

Jenny eyed him curiously, and then, as he smiled infectiously, she did,
too.

"Now," went on Wise, "this is the game. I don't know, of course, whom you
have in mind, and you don't know whom I have in mind, so we'll play the
game this way: I'll say, 'I know she is a clever woman.' Now you make a
truthful statement about her."

Enthralled by his manner, Jenny said, almost involuntarily, "I know she
is a wrong one!"

"I know she's pretty," said Wise.

"I know she isn't!" snapped Jenny.

"I know she is black-haired and dresses well and owns a scarab hatpin."

"I know that, too," and Jenny was breathless with interest.

"No; that won't do. You must know something different from my know."

"Well, I know she's a friend of Mr. Rodman."

"And of Mr. Gately," added Wise.

"Oh, no, sir, I don't think so!" Jenny's surprise was unfeigned.

"Well, I know she's a telegraph girl."

"Yes: and I know she has more money to spend than she gets for a salary."

"I know she's a good girl."

"Oh, yes, sir,--that way. But she----"

"She smokes cigarettes."

"Yes; she does. Oh, I think that's awful."

"Well, it's your turn. You know she's 'The Link'?"

"I know she's been called that, but it isn't a regular nickname, and I
don't know what it means."

"Where is she?"

"Her work, you mean?"

"Yes; she's in the company's office,----" Here Jenny whispered the
address to Wise.

"Good girl," he commented. "Keep it dark. No use in telling all these
people!"

He turned to my telephone, then said: "No, Brice, you do it. Call
Headquarters and tell the Chief to arrest,--what's her name, Jenny?"

"I--I didn't say, sir." The girl's caution was returning.

"Say now, then," commanded Wise. "I know, anyway. It begins with S."

"Her first name,--yes, sir."

"And the last name with K. You see I know! So, out with it!"

"Sadie Kent," whispered Jenny, her nerves beginning to go to pieces at
realizaton of what she had done.

"Yes, of course. Sadie Kent. Go ahead, Brice. Fix it all up,--and go to
the telegraph office yourself. Meet the officers there. Scoot!"

I scooted. The strong arm of the law works swiftly when it wills to do
so. Within half an hour Sadie Kent was arrested at her key in the
telegraph office on charge of stealing confidential telegrams sent by
officials in Washington to munition plants and steamship companies and
delivering them to persons who she knew would transmit them to the German
Foreign Office.

When approached, the girl,--the woman rather,--put up a bold bluff, but
it was of no avail. She was taken into custody, and all her appeals for
mercy denied. All but one. She begged so hard to be allowed to telephone
to her mother that Hudson, who was present, softened.

"You can't, my lady," he said, "but I'll have it done for you. Mr. Brice,
now, maybe he'll do it."

"Oh, if you would be so kind," and the beautiful brunette, for she was
that, gave me a grateful look. "Just call 83649 Greenwich Square, and ask
for Mrs. Kent. Then tell her, please, that--that I won't be home tonight.
That's all."

Her voice broke and she sobbed softly in her handkerchief.

They took her away, to be detained pending developments. I made the call
and gave the message exactly as she had asked me. A pleasant voice
responded, saying the speaker was Mrs. Kent, and she thanked me for
sending word.

I hurried back to my rooms. Wise and Rivers were still there but Norah
and Jenny had left. I had no sooner got my coat off than Zizi came flying
in.

"Oh, everybody," she cried, in a whirl of excitement, "Olive's gone!
She's kidnaped or abducted or something. A telephone message came and she
flew off, telling nobody but Mrs. Vail, and telling her not to tell!"

"Where's she gone?" I cried, flinging back into my coat.

"Nobody knows. I only got it out of Mrs. Vail this minute, and then only
by threatening her with all sorts of horrors if she didn't tell me. She
doesn't know where Olive's gone,--nobody knows,--but whoever telephoned
said he had Amory Manning with him, just for a few moments and for her to
come at once if she wanted to see him. A car would come for her at four
o'clock, exactly, and she was to get in and ask no questions. And she
did--and she told Mrs. Vail that as soon as she got to Mr. Manning she
would telephone back,--in about fifteen minutes. And now it's over an
hour! and no word from her! That stupid old woman just walks up and down
and wrings her hands!"

"I should think she would! Which way shall we look, Wise?"

"I don't know, I'm sure!" and for once the resourceful detective was
absolutely at a loss.

"Oh, Penny Wise," and Zizi burst into tears, "if _you_ don't know what to
do, nobody does! Olive will be killed or held for ransom or some dreadful
thing! What _can_ we do?"

But the dull silence that fell on us all proved that no one present was
able to offer any suggestion.




                              CHAPTER XIII
                           Olive's Adventure


"Give me a handkerchief, somebody!" commanded Zizi, and not without
reason, for her own tiny wisp of cambric was nothing but a wet ball,
which she was futilely dabbing into her big black eyes.

I hurried into my bedroom and hastily grabbed a fresh handkerchief from a
drawer, which I brought to the excited girl.

"Thanks," she said, as she grasped it and plied it diligently; "now, men,
we must get busy! It's after five o'clock, Olive went away before
four,--anything may have happened to her--we _must_ rescue her!"

"We will!" exclaimed Case Rivers, showing more energy than I knew he
possessed. "What about 'The Link,' Mr. Brice?"

As quickly as I could, I detailed what had happened at the telegraph
office, where Sadie Kent had been taken into custody by Hudson's men.

"Did she go quietly?" asked Penny Wise.

"She did not!" I returned; "she put up a fearful fight, tore up a lot of
papers from a desk drawer, and lit into the policemen like a tiger cat!
She tried to bite Hudson, and yet, he was the one who kind-heartedly let
her telephone to her mother."

"What!" cried Rivers, "he let her do that!"

"I did it myself, really," I said; and I told how Sadie had begged for
the privilege.

"There you are!" Rivers said, positively. "That telephone message was not
to her mother!"

"But I called her up," I explained, "and she said she was Mrs. Kent."

"That may be," and Rivers shook his head; "but, don't you see, that was a
code call,--a warning. The person who received it, mother or grandmother,
caught on to the state of things and set machinery in motion that
resulted in the kidnaping of Miss Raynor."

"What for?" I asked, blankly.

"Revenge, probably, but there may be other villainies afoot. Am I right,
Mr. Wise?"

"Yes, and mighty quick-witted. Then the next step is to go to the
'mother's' house."

"Yes, if we can trace it. It may be a call within a call; I mean, the
number Mr. Brice got may be merely a go-between--a link----"

"Try it, anyway," implored Zizi; "every minute is precious. I'm so afraid
for Miss Olive. You know, she's spunky,--she won't submit easily to
restraint, and you don't know what they may do to her!"

"Get Information first," directed Wise, as I started for the telephone.
"Find the address of the number you called. You remember it?"

"Yes; of course." And in a few moments I learned that the house was down
in Washington Square.

"Get a taxi," said Zizi, already putting on her long black cape, which
swirled round the slender figure as she flung one end over her shoulder.

She flew to a mirror, and was dabbing her straight little nose with a
powder-puff as she talked.

"We'll all go down there, and I don't think we'll have to look any
further. Miss Olive is there,--I'm dead sure! Held by the enemy! But
she's game, and I don't believe we'll be too late, if we hustle like a
house afire!"

And so, with the greatest speed consistent with safety, we taxied down to
the house in Washington Square.

The Kent apartment was on the third floor, and as Zizi dashed up the
stairs, not waiting for the elevator, we three men followed her.

Zizi's ring at the bell brought a middle-aged woman to the door, who
looked at us rather blankly.

I was about to speak, when Zizi, insinuating her small self through the
partly opened door, said softly:

"We've a message from 'The Link.'"

It acted like magic, and the woman's face changed to an expression of
welcome and serious anxiety, as we all went in.

It was rather a pretentious apartment, with fine furnishings in ornate
taste. We saw no one save the woman who admitted us, and heard no sound
from other rooms.

"You expected it?" and Zizi's air of secret understanding was perfect.

"Expected what?" said Mrs. Kent, sharply, for she was apparently on her
guard.

"Sadie's arrest," and Zizi's black eyes narrowed as she looked keenly at
the other.

But the woman was not to be trapped. She glanced at us each in turn, and
seemed to conclude we were not friendly visitors for all Zizi's pretense.

"I know nothing of any arrest," she said, evenly; "I think you have
mistaken the house."

"I think not," and Penny Wise looked at her sternly. "Your bluff won't
go, madam,--Sadie, 'The Link,' is arrested, and the game is up. Will you
answer questions or will you wait until you, too, are arrested?"

"I have nothing to say," she mumbled, but her voice trembled, and her
nerve was deserting her. Inadvertently she glanced toward the closed door
of the next room, and Zizi's quick eyes followed the glance.

"Is Miss Raynor in there?" she flung out so quickly that Mrs. Kent
gasped. But she recovered her poise at once and said, "I don't know what
you mean,--I don't know any Miss Raynor."

"Oh, tut, tut!" and Zizi grinned at her; "don't tell naughty stories!
Why, I hear Miss Raynor's voice!"

She didn't at all, but as she listened, with her head cocked on one side,
like a saucy bird, Mrs. Kent's face showed fear, and she listened also.

A muffled scream was heard,--not loud, but clearly a cry for help.

Without further parley, Rivers made a dash for the door and though it was
locked, he smashed into the rather flimsy panel and the old hinges gave
way.

There, in the adjoining room was Olive Raynor, a handkerchief tied across
her mouth and her angry eyes flashing with rage.

Holding her arm was George Rodman, who was evidently trying to intimidate
her, but without complete success.

Zizi flew to Olive's side, and snatched off the handkerchief.

Rodman was perfectly cool. "Let that lady alone," he said; "she is my
affianced wife."

"Affianced grandmother!" retorted Zizi. "You can't put that over, Mr.
Rodman!"

"Save me!" Olive said, looking from me to Penny Wise and back again. Her
glance fell on Rivers, but returned to me, as her face assumed a look of
agony.

I couldn't quite understand, as she must know that with us all there her
danger was past.

"Are you his betrothed?" Case Rivers said, bluntly.

"No!" Olive replied, in an indignant tone; "never!"

"Then----" and Rivers seemed about to remove Rodman's hand from Olive's
arm by force, but Rodman himself spoke up:

"One moment, please," he said, quietly, and bending over, he whispered in
Olive's ear.

She turned deathly white, her lips quivered, and she seemed about to
fall. Whatever the brief words were, they wrought a marvelous change in
the girl's attitude. She lost her air of defiant wrath, and seemed a
helpless, hopeless victim of the man who held her.

"Are you engaged to me?" Rodman said, looking at Olive, with a
threatening scowl.

"Yes," she managed to whisper, but so agonized was her face that it was
palpable she spoke under coercion.

I was uncertain what to do; Wise, too, looked nonplussed, but Rivers,
though a stranger to Olive, seemed imbued with an irresistible chivalry,
and drawing nearer to her, he said:

"Is that man forcing you to say that against your will?"

Rodman's grip tightened on Olive's arm, and his glowering face looked
sternly into hers. She made no reply in words, but her piteous glance
told all too clearly that Rivers' assumption was correct.

And yet, what could we do? Olive had assented to Rodman's assertion, and
we could scarcely demand a girl from her fiancé.

Zizi mastered the situation by saying, triumphantly: "We've got 'The
Link!' She's under arrest!"

"What!" cried Olive, and then, dropping her arm, Rodman whirled toward
her:

"There!" he cried, "your secret is out! Unless----" He made a gesture as
if to put his arm round her.

With a cry of revulsion, Olive shrank from him, and her face showed that
she preferred his threatening attitude to his endearing one.

"You let that lady alone, unless she desires your attentions," said
Rivers, his innate desire to protect a woman in distress showing in his
repressed eagerness to get at Rodman.

"You mind your own business!" shouted Rodman, angrily, as he put out his
arm and drew Olive to him. "You're mine, now, aren't you, dearie?"

The disgust on the girl's face, and the shrinking of her form as she
tried to draw away from the leering face so near hers was too much for
Rivers. He assumed a threatening attitude, and said, "You take your hands
off that lady! She doesn't want----"

In defiance, Rodman drew Olive nearer, and raising her bowed head was
about to kiss her angry, beautiful face, when she uttered a despairing
scream.

That was the match in the powder-keg!

Unable to hold back longer, Rivers sprang forward and wrenched Olive from
Rodman's grasp.

With a snarl, Rodman lunged at Rivers, who deftly stopped him with an
uppercut. Rodman came back with a smashing facer, and Rivers replied in
kind.

Zizi, who had flown to Olive's side, and was tenderly soothing her,
watched the two men, breathlessly. Something savage in her nature
responded to the combat, and she flushed and paled alternately as one or
the other of the angry men seemed to have the upper hand.

Olive hid her face in her hands, not wanting to look, but Zizi was with
the fight, heart and soul.

It was give and take, with such rapidity that I trembled for Rivers'
safety. Rodman was a formidable antagonist, and far heavier than the
gaunt man who met and returned his blows.

But Rivers was skilled, and made up in technique what he lacked in
strength.

So desperate was the struggle, so blindly furious the two men, that
Pennington Wise and I were fearful of results. With a simultaneous
impulse we made a dash to separate the combatants, but were obliged to
get back quickly to save ourselves from the rain of blows.

Never had I seen such a wild, unbridled fight compressed into such a
short time, and I wondered what Rivers had been in a fighting way before
he lost his identity.

Fighting and boxing had never been favorite forms of entertainment with
me, but this contest absorbed me. It was primitive, instinctive,--the
rage of Rodman pitted against the angry indignation of Rivers.

I had not thought of the latter as a weakling, but neither had I looked
upon him as a strong man, and I should have judged that in a bout with
Rodman he would have gone under.

But not so; his lean, gaunt frame was full of latent strength, his bony
fists full of dexterity.

He rushed in, fell back, sidestepped, with the dazzling quickness of a
trained fighter. He showed knowledge and skill that amazed me.

Rodman, too, fought for all he was worth, but he impressed me as being
not an experienced fighter,--and not a fair one.

Wise, too, was watching Rivers with wonder and admiration, and he also
kept his alert gaze on Rodman.

Fascinated, we watched as Rodman clinched, and Rivers with a smile,
almost of contempt, threw him off. Then Rodman, bellowing like an angry
bull, made a head-on rush for Rivers, who neatly sidestepped, letting his
furious antagonist have it on the side of his head.

Even this didn't knock any sense into Rodman, and he was about to plunge
again, when Wise, seeing a chance, said:

"Now, Brice!"

Springing in, I hooked my arm around Rivers' neck, and yanked him away
from Rodman, now struggling, half-spent, in Wise's grasp.

"Let up, Rivers!" I cried, sternly; "what do you mean?"

He glared at me, not sensing what I said, and then, Rodman, breaking
loose, came at him madly, Rivers slithered out of my clutch and caught
the other a smashing blow on the ear. This, landing just as Rodman was
off his balance from his break-away from Wise, spun him around and sent
him down with a crash which knocked all the fight out of him, and he made
but a half-hearted attempt to rise.

Satisfied, Rivers turned to me, and then, with a half-apologetic glance
at Olive, murmured: "Sorry! Couldn't help it, Miss Raynor. Brute!"

The last was addressed to his fallen foe, and was met by a vindictive
glance, but no other retort.

Rodman, however, was pulling himself together and we were of one mind as
to our next procedure, which was to get Olive Raynor away from that
house.

"Beat it," Wise decreed; "you're a good one, Mr. Rivers! My hat's off to
you. Now, if you're fit, and you look it, will you and Mr. Brice take
Miss Raynor home, and I'll stay here and clear up this little
disturbance. Hop along with them, Ziz; I'll join you all at the house as
soon as I can."

The faithful taxi was waiting, and Rivers and I put the two girls in, and
followed them. Rivers was very quiet and seemed preoccupied. He looked
not at all like a conqueror, and I guessed that the fight had stirred
some chord of remembrance, and he was now struggling with his lost
memory. In silence we went most of the way home.

Before we reached the house, however, he shook off his reverie with an
impatient gesture that said, as clearly as words could have done, that he
had failed to catch the elusive thread that bound him to the past and
that he had returned to the present.

Olive saw it, too, and putting out her hand, said, frankly:

"I owe you deep gratitude, Mr. Rivers. I suppose I was in no real danger,
with you men there, but I must confess I was glad to have that wretch
punished."

Her lovely face glowed with righteous indignation, and Zizi's pert little
countenance showed deep satisfaction.

"You gave it to him, good and plenty, Mr. Rivers," she fairly crowed; "it
was a treat to see you put it all over him! Now, you've knocked him out
physically, Penny Wise will mop up the floor with him mentally and
morally! What did he do to you, Miss Olive? Why did he make you say you
were his girl?"

The look of agony returned to Olive's face, as if she had just
recollected what the man had said to her.

"He threatened me," she said, slowly; "with an awful threat! I can't
think about it! Oh, I don't know what to do! I can't tell it--I can't
tell it to anybody----"

"Wait till you get home," I counseled her, and Rivers added, "And wait
till Mr. Wise comes. He's the man you must tell, and he will advise you.
But, I say, we're getting at things, eh, Brice? 'The Link' under arrest,
Wise onto Rodman, and he won't let go of him, either, and Miss Raynor
safe,--whew! I feel as if we should just forge ahead now!"

"Sure we will!" declared Zizi, her little face glowing with anticipation.
"Never you mind. Miss Olive, dear; whatever that man threatened, Penny
Wise will look after him."

"But----" began Olive, and then stopped, for we had reached her home.

"Oh, my darling child," exclaimed Mrs. Vail, as we went in, "where have
you been? I've been nearly crazy!"

I think we all felt a sudden twinge of shame, for none of us had thought
to relieve the poor lady's suspense as to Olive's fate! We ought to have
telephoned, at least. But she was now smiling and happy at the safe
return of her charge and eager to know all the details of the adventure.

Both Olive and Zizi went off with Mrs. Vail, who was chattering volubly,
and I was left alone with Rivers.

"The fight,--on which let me congratulate you,--stirred some old memory?"
I said, inquiringly.

"For a few moments, yes;" he returned, looking deeply thoughtful. "But it
was both vague and evanescent, I couldn't nail it. Oh!" and he made an
impatient gesture, "it is maddening! I seem just on the edge of complete
recollection,--and, then,--it's gone again, and my mind is a positive
blank regarding it. But, it's no use worrying, Brice," and he spoke
cheerfully, "I'm sure it will come, some day. Until then I shall be Case
Rivers, and if I die under the name, I'll try, at least, not to disgrace
it."

"You didn't disgrace it today," I said, heartily. "You put up a
first-class fight, and in a righteous cause."

"I couldn't stand it to see Miss Raynor bullied by that brute," he
returned, simply, "and then, too, I felt a natural antagonism toward him
on my own account. No," as I started to speak, "I know what you're going
to say, and I don't think I knew him before I lost my memory. Maybe I
did, but it wasn't that that startled me to thinking back. It was
something else,--some other impression, that made me have a fraction of a
reminiscence of something,--oh, I don't know what, but I'm going to take
it as an omen of future good fortune."




                              CHAPTER XIV
                           Where is Manning?


"You're to stay for dinner," a voice said, speaking from the shadows at
the other end of the long room.

As I looked toward it, Zizi's little white face gleamed between the
portières, and in another moment she slid through and was at my side.

"Miss Raynor says so, and Mrs. Vail adds her invitation. They're going to
keep Penny Wise when he returns, and Miss Raynor----"

"Miss Raynor wants to thank Mr. Rivers for his good work," and Olive
herself followed in Zizi's footsteps. She was smiling now, but her lips
were tremulous and her eyes showed unshed tears.

"Nothing to thank me for," returned Case Rivers, quickly, "on the
contrary, I want to apologize for such an exhibition of wrath before a
lady. But I confess I lost all self-control when I saw that brute
intimidating you. If you absolve me of offense, I am thoroughly glad I
did him up! And you do?"

"Indeed, yes!" and Olive's frank gaze was sincere but sad, too. "I was
terribly frightened,--and,--I am still."

"Why?" cried Rivers, abruptly, and then added, "but I've no right to
ask."

"Yes, you have," Olive assured him, "but--I've no right to tell you. Mr.
Rodman holds a threat over my head, and--and----"

Just then Wise arrived, and Mrs. Vail came into the room with him.

Olive welcomed him gladly, and then, as dinner was announced, we all went
to the dining-room.

"No discussion of our momentous affairs while we eat," Wise commanded,
and so we enjoyed the occasion as if it were a social affair.

The conversation was interesting, for Pennington Wise was a well-informed
man and a good _raconteur_; Rivers proved to be most entertaining and
clever at repartee; and though Olive was very quiet, Mrs. Vail kept up an
amusing chatter, and Zizi was her own elfin self and flung out bits of
her odd talk at intervals.


We returned to the big library for coffee, and then, almost abruptly,
Wise began to question Olive as to her adventure that afternoon.

"Mr. Rivers was quite right," he said, "in assuming the telephone call
sent by Sadie Kent to her 'mother' was a trick. Mighty clever of you," he
turned to Rivers, "and it led to the arrest of Rodman. The woman called
Mrs. Kent is not Sadie's mother, but a companion in crime. For Sadie,
'The Link,' is a criminal and a deep one! But first, Miss Raynor, let us
have your story."

"When I answered the telephone call," Olive began, "a man's voice said,
rather brusquely, 'We have Amory Manning here. If you want to see him,
come here at once.' I said,--of course, I was terribly excited,--'Where
are you? who are you?' The voice replied, 'Never mind all that. You have
to make quick decision. If you want to see Manning, a taxi will call for
you in five minutes. Tell nobody, or you will queer the whole game. Do
you consent?' I may not give his exact words, but that was his general
meaning. I had to think quickly; I _did_ want to see Mr. Manning, and I
feared no harm. So I said I agreed to all the stipulations, I would tell
no one, and I would go in the taxicab that would come for me."

"But you told me," put in Mrs. Vail, who liked to feel her importance.

"Yes," went on Olive, "I felt I must leave some word, for I had an uneasy
feeling that all was not right. If Amory Manning was there, why didn't he
telephone himself? But, I reasoned, he might be, well--in fact, I thought
he was,--held for ransom, and in that case I was ready and willing to pay
it. So, I said nothing to Zizi, for I knew she would tell----"

"Wow! Yes!" came from Zizi's corner, where she sat on a low ottoman.

"And so, I went alone. The taxi was at the curb when I left this house. I
got in, and was taken to the house in Washington Square. I felt no fear
until, after Mrs. Kent admitted me, she showed me into a room where I
found myself confronted by Mr. Rodman. Mrs. Kent remained with me, but I
saw at once she was not friendly.

"'Where is Mr. Manning?' I asked. Mr. Rodman only laughed rudely and said
he hadn't the slightest idea. And then I knew it was all a trap,--but I
didn't know _why_ I was tricked there. And then," Olive paused, and a
deep blush came over her face, but she shook her head and went bravely
on, "then he tried to make love to me. I appealed to Mrs. Kent, but she
only laughed scornfully at my distress. He said if I would marry him he
would protect me from all suspicion of being implicated in--in the death
of my guardian! Of course, that didn't scare me, and I told him I wasn't
suspected now, by anybody. Then he dropped that line of argument and told
me if I didn't marry him,--he would--oh, that part I can't tell!"

"Blackmail!" said Wise, looking at her intently.

"Yes," she replied, "and it was an awful threat! Then, he saw I was
indignant and not to be intimidated--oh, I pretended to be much more
courageous than I really was,--and he began to talk more politely and
very seriously. He said, if I would call off Mr. Wise and make no further
effort to run down my uncle's murderer, he would send me home safely, and
molest me no further. I wouldn't agree to this; and then he grew ugly
again, and lost his temper, and--oh, he talked dreadfully!" Olive
shuddered at the recollection, and her lips quivered.

With quick sympathy, Zizi moved noiselessly from her place, and, kneeling
at Olive's side, took her hand. With a grateful glance at the comforting
little fingers caressing her own, Olive went on:

"He stormed and he threatened me, and that Kent woman joined in and said
terrible things! And I was so frightened I couldn't pretend I wasn't any
longer,--and I didn't know what to do! And then the bell rang, and Mrs.
Kent went to the door, and as I looked hopeful,--I suppose, for I
welcomed the thought of anybody's coming,--Mr. Rodman threw a
handkerchief around my mouth and tied it behind my head. 'There, my
lady,' he said, 'you won't scream for help quite as quickly as you
planned to!' And I couldn't make a sound! Then, when I heard familiar
voices,--Zizi's and Mr. Wise's, I knew I _must_ make myself heard, and
with a desperate effort, I got out a groan or wail for help, though that
awful man stood over me with his hand raised to strike me!"

"You poor darling!" exclaimed Mrs. Vail, putting her arm round Olive, "it
was fearful! Why, once I heard of a case like that--no, I read it in a
book,--and the girl fainted!"

"Well, I didn't faint, but I almost collapsed from sheer fright lest I
couldn't make a loud enough sound to be heard by you people."

"Oh, we were coming!" said Zizi, "I saw by the old hen's face she had you
boxed up in there, and I was going to do some ground and lofty yelling
myself, if Mr. Rivers hadn't smashed in the door just as he did."

"I couldn't hold back," said Rivers, "I gave way to a blind impulse,--and
I'm glad I did!"

"I'm glad, too," and Olive gave him a grateful smile.

"But then," cried Zizi, "he made you say you were engaged to him----"

"Yes," and Olive paled as with fear. "I can't tell about that----"

"You said you weren't, and then he whispered to you, and then you said
you were," went on Zizi, remorselessly reviewing the scene.

"I know it,--but--oh, don't ask me! Perhaps, I'll tell--later,--if I have
to,--but--I can't--I can't."

Olive's head drooped on Zizi's shoulder, and the eerie little voice said,
"There, there,--don't talk any more now, Miss Olive, dear. Penny Wise,
you carry on the conversation from this point."

"All right," said Wise, "I'll tell my story. George Rodman is in the
hands of the police, but I doubt very much if they can prove anything on
him. He's a sly proposition, and covers his tracks mighty well. Moreover,
as to the murder of Mr. Gately, Rodman has a perfect alibi."

"Your First Lessons in Sleuthing always say, 'distrust the perfect
alibi,'" murmured Zizi, without looking up from her occupation of
smoothing Olive's softly banded hair.

"Yes,--manufactured ones. But in this case there seems to be no question.
A Federal detective, who has had his eye on Rodman for some time, was in
Rodman's office at the very time Mr. Gately was killed."

"But Mr. Rodman went down on the same elevator I did, soon after the
shooting," I exclaimed.

"How soon after?"

"Less than half an hour. And Rodman got on at the seventh floor."

"That's all right, the Federal Office man knows that. They went down
together from the tenth,--Rodman's floor,--to the seventh, and then after
they looked after something there, Rodman went on down alone."

"All right," I said, for I knew that Wise and the Federal Detective were
not being hoodwinked by any George Rodman!

"And here's the situation," Wise went on; "Sadie Kent is a German
telegraph spy. She is called 'The Link,' because she has been an
important link in the German spy system. A trusted employee and an expert
operator of long experience, she has stolen information from hundreds of
telegrams and turned it over to a man who transmitted it to Berlin by a
secret avenue of communication. A telegram has been sent to Washington
asking for a presidential warrant to hold her until the case can be
investigated. She is also one large and emphatic wildcat! She bites and
scratches with feline ferocity, and is under strong and careful
restrictions."

"And she is the one," I said, "whose identity we learned from
Jenny--and,--oh, yes, whose identity you guessed, Mr. Wise, from some
cigarette stubs, and----"

"Oh, I say," Wise interrupted me, shortly, "we must get the truth from
her by quizzing, not by clews. We've arrested her, now, and----"

Olive stirred uneasily, and Zizi, after a quick, intelligent glance at
Wise, which he answered by a nod, rose to her feet, and urged Olive to
rise and go with her.

"You're all in, Miss Olive," she said, gently, "and I'm going to take you
off to sleepy-by. Tell the nice gentlemen good-night, and come along with
your Zizi-zoo. Upsy-diddy, now," and smilingly, Zizi persuaded Olive to
go with her. "You come, too, Mrs. Vail," Zizi added, because, I noticed,
of an almost imperceptible nod from Wise in the elder lady's direction.
"We just simpully can't get along without you."

Pleased at the flattering necessity for her presence, Mrs. Vail went from
the room with the two girls. "I'll be back," she called out to us, as she
left the room.


"She won't," said Wise, decidedly, after the sound of footsteps died
away, "Zizi'll look out for that. Now, Brice, I've important new
information. I didn't want to divulge it before Miss Raynor, tonight, for
she has had about all she can bear today. But it begins to look as if
Sadie Kent sold her stolen telegrams to Rodman, and he--can't you guess?"

"No," I said, blankly, and Rivers said, "Tell us."

"Why, I believe he turned them over to Gately."

"Gately! Amos Gately mixed up in spy business! Man, you're crazy!"

"Crazy does it, then! Haven't we positive proof that Sadie Kent was in
Gately's office the day he was killed?"

"How?" I said, wonderingly. "Did she kill him?"

"Lord, no! But didn't I size her up from the hatpin? and didn't your girl
trace the powder-paper? and didn't we see cigarette stubs with the S.K.
monogram,--in Mr. Gately's private office,--and his own cigar stubs
there, too, as if she had been there in intimate chat!"

"Are you sure about the powder-paper?" I cried, impressed by the
realization of Norah's hand in the discovery.

"Yes; we know, at least, that she has bought them from that shop. You
see, she has lots of money beside her salary from the telegraph company."

"Rather!" said Rivers, "if she's selling Government secrets!"

"Well," I said, after the whole disclosure began to sink into my brain,
"if Sadie Kent sat around in Mr. Gately's office, smoking and chatting,
with her hat off, and her powder-papers in evidence, she was pretty
friendly with him!"

"Of course she was," and Wise looked grave. "That's what I dread to tell
Miss Raynor. For it implicates Amos Gately in some way; either he is
mixed up in the spy racket,--or--Miss Kent was his friend--socially!"

"Oh, come now," I said, "don't let's say that sort of thing."

"But, my dear man, unpleasant though it be to assume an intimacy between
the bank president and the handsome telegraph girl,--yet, isn't that
preferable,--to----"

"To brand him with the shameful suspicion of receiving spy secrets!"
Rivers completed the sentence. "Yes, it is! The most disgraceful
revelations of a liaison would be as nothing compared with the ignominy
of spy work!"

"I know that," I hastened to explain myself, "but I can't connect either
disgrace with Amos Gately! You didn't know him, Wise, and you, Rivers,
didn't either. Nor did I know him personally,--but I did know,--and do
know, that no breath of suspicion can be attached to Amos Gately's whole
career! Why, he was a synonym for all that is best in finance, in
politics, in society! I'm glad you didn't hint this before Olive Raynor!
It would have crushed the poor child."

"She'll have to learn it sooner or later," and Wise shook his head.
"There's no doubt about it in my mind. You see, 'The Link' usually took
her news to Rodman and he secretly, and by means of the secret elevator,
carried it to Gately who gave it over to the agents of the German
Government."

"Do you know this?" asked Rivers.

"I couldn't get Rodman to admit it, but when I taxed him with something
of the sort, he flew into such a rage that I'm sure I struck the truth."

"Where's Rodman now?"

"The Department of Justice has his case in hand. They'll look after him.
But I don't see how we can connect him with the murder of Gately. I don't
for a minute doubt he'd be quite capable of it, but he wasn't there at
the time."

"Was Sadie Kent?" and Rivers frowned thoughtfully.

"Not at the time of the shooting. Brice, here, can testify to that."

"Not unless she was in hiding," I said, "and she wasn't, for I looked in
the cupboards and all that. We seem to have proved Sadie there before the
murderer was, but I don't suspect her of shooting Gately."

"Nor I," agreed Wise, "but it was unusual for her to go to Mr. Gately's
office. It must be that she had grown more daring of late, and had some
hold over Gately, so that she felt safe in going there."

"Can't they get all that out of Sadie?"

"She's a slippery sort. She pretends to speak frankly, but what she tells
means little and is misleading."

"Where is she?"

"For the moment, down at Kenilworth House. Detained there till they're
sure of the persons working with her."

"She'll get away," said Rivers, "she ought to be in jail."

Now it was a strange thing, but this casual prophecy of Rivers' was
fulfilled the very next day!

I was in my office, absorbedly conversing with Norah on the
all-engrossing subject of the Gately case, when Zizi dashed in.

"Alone I did it!" she exclaimed, and tossing the folds of her voluminous
black cape over her shoulder, she folded her arms and assumed the
attitude of Napoleon; scowling from under her heavy black brows, though
her eyes were dancing.

"What have you done?" I asked, while Norah gazed enchanted at the
dramatic little figure.

"Returned the missing 'Link' to her rightful owners!"

"What! Sadie?"

"The same. You know, Mr. Rivers said she'd break loose from that
Whatchacallit House, and make trouble--also, which she done!"

"Tell us about it," I urged.

"That's what I'm here for. Mr. Wise sent me to tell you that,--and a lot
of other messages. Well," and Zizi's black eyes snapped with
satisfaction, "somebody called this morning to see Miss Raynor. And that
somebody was none other than Sadie, 'The Link!' She sent up a different
name,--I forget what, now,--and Miss Olive went down to see her. And she
blackmailed Miss Olive good and plenty! You see, little Ziz was listening
from behind a convenient portière, and I heard it all. The whole idea was
that if Miss Olive would quit all investigations, there would be no tales
told. But if she kept up her detective work,--that is, if she kept Mr.
Wise on the job, then revelations would be made about her guardian, Mr.
Gately, that Sadie said would blast his name forever. Olive seemed to
understand just what these revelations were, for she didn't ask, but she
was scared to pieces, and was about ready to give in when I slid into the
game. But,--before I joined the confab I called up Penny Wise on an
upstairs telephone and invited him to come along hastily and bring a
squad of policemen or something that could hold that 'Link'!

"Then I sauntered into the library, where the blackmailing session was
being held, and I stood by. We had a war of words,--'The Link' and
I,--but it didn't amount to much, for I was really only sparring for time
till Penny Wise blew in. But I kept Miss Olive quiet, and I gave 'The
Link' a song and dance that made her think some! I told her we knew she
wrote the blackmailing letter to Miss Olive, signed 'A Friend,' and that
she could be jailed for that! She wilted some, but carried it off with a
high hand and soon Penny came and he had his little helpers along. They
were in uniform, and they seemed mighty glad to get back their long-lost
friend and comrade, 'The Link'!"

"You clever little piece!" cried Norah, "to think of your getting that
girl again, after she had broken loose! Didn't they appreciate it?"

"Yes," and Zizi smiled, modestly; "but it's all in the day's work. I
don't care much about appreciation, except from Mr. Wise."

She had thrown off her long cloak, and her slender, lithe little figure
leaned over the back of a chair. "But," she cried, twirling round
suddenly to me, "I did do one more little trick! When they were taking
Sadie away, I sidled up to her, and--oh, well, I s'pose I am a direct
descendant of some light-fingered gentry,--I picked her pocket!"

"What did you get?"

"Her pocket,--by which I mean her little leather hand-bag, was never out
of her hand for a minute! The way she hung on to it,--fairly clutched
it,--made me think it contained something of interest to our side. So I
just picked it on general principles. And I got the goods!"

"What?" cried Norah and I together.

"Some stuff in code, or in cipher,--I dunno just what it was. But Penny
took it, and he's tickled to death to get it. Gibberish, of course, but
he'll make it out. He's clever at ciphers, and it will likely be the
final proof of 'The Link's' perfidy,--and,--" here Zizi's head drooped,
and her eyes saddened,--"maybe it will show up Mr. Gately or----"

"Or whom?"

"You know! But," she brightened again, "here's something else yet! I'm on
the job day and night, you know, and, if you inquire of me, I'd just as
lief spill it to you, that Miss Olive is a whole lot interested in that
fascinating Mr. Rivers!"

"Oh, now," and Norah looked reproof at the saucy, smiling girl, "Miss
Raynor is the _fiancée_ of Amory Manning."

"Nixy! she told me she never was engaged to Mr. Manning. And when I tease
her about Mr. Rivers, she blushes the loveliest pink you ever saw, and
says, 'Oh, Zizi, don't be a silly!' but then she sits and waits for me to
be a silly again!"

"But she hasn't seen Rivers half a dozen times," I said, smiling at
Zizi's flight of imagination.

"That's nothing," she scoffed; "if ever there was a case of love at first
sight, those two have got it! They don't really know it themselves yet,
but if Amory Manning wants Miss Olive, he'd better come out of hiding and
win her while the winning's good! And it's my belief he'd be too late
now! And here's a straw to show which way that wind blows. The picture of
Mr. Manning that was on Miss Olive's dresser has disappeared!"

"That may not mean anything," I said, for I didn't think it right to
encourage Zizi's romancing.

"But I asked Miss Olive about it, and she hesitated and stammered, and
never did say why she had put it away. And, too, you ought to see her
eyes smile when she expects Mr. Rivers to call! He's making a lace
pattern for her, and they have to discuss it a lot! Ohé, oho!"

The mischievous little face took on a gentle, tender look and Norah
smiled with the sympathy of one who, like all the rest of the world,
loves a lover.

"But," I said, musingly, "none of this brings us any nearer to the
discovery of Amos Gately's murderer, or to the discovery of Amory
Manning,--which are the two ends and aims of our present existence."

"Did it ever occur to you, Mr. Brice,"--Zizi's face grew very
serious,--"that those two quests will lead you to the same man?"

I looked at her,--stunned to silence.

Then, as suddenly shocked into speech, "No!" I fairly shouted, "it never
did!"




                               CHAPTER XV
                           Wise's Pipe Dream


The mystery was a baffling one. I learned from Pennington Wise that he
had a pipe dream that Amory Manning had killed Amos Gately.

But, save for the faithful Zizi, he could find no one to share his
suspicion. It was too absurd. In the first place, had Manning done the
deed, he never would have hung around the scene of the crime as he did,
for nearly an hour. I remembered perfectly his demeanor and expression,
as I saw him, with Olive Raynor that afternoon. He was deeply concerned,
greatly shocked, and most considerate and thoughtful of Olive, but there
was no shadow of guilt on his fine, strong face.

I had looked at him closely both during the excitement of the tragedy
itself, and later, as we were in the street-car, and I noted his grave,
serious countenance, but though he seemed puzzled and anxious, there was
no mark of Cain on his brow.

I told Wise this, and he listened, duly impressed, but, as he finally
owned up, he saw no other way to look.

"It wasn't Rodman," he asserted; "that chap is a traitor and a spy, but
he's no murderer. And, too, he was in cahoots with Gately, and the last
thing he wanted was to lose his patron. It wasn't Sadie, of course; she
too, wanted Gately alive, not dead. I know the unwillingness of Olive's
guardian to listen to Manning's suit, seems a slight motive,--yet where
can we find a suspect with a stronger one?"

"We haven't as yet," I returned, "but there must be people implicated in
that spy business,--if that's a true bill against Gately----"

"Oh, it's a true bill, all right. Amos Gately was a wolf in sheep's
clothing! Miss Raynor will have to know it sooner or later. She really
knows it now, but she won't let herself believe it."

"What about that paper Zizi took from Sadie Kent?"

"That's what I'm working on. Meet me this afternoon at the Raynor house,
and I may be able to tell you."

The big, cheerful library at Olive's house had come to be our general
meeting-place of an afternoon. I usually dropped in there about four
o'clock, and was pretty sure to find Wise or Rivers or both there. Zizi
was a whole vaudeville show herself, and Olive was always cordial and
hospitable. Mrs. Vail, too, was a gentle old lady, and I had grown to
like her.

So I went, as Wise suggested, and found him poring over the mysterious
paper.

Looking at it for the first time, I saw merely a lot of letters,
pen-written, and arranged in long rows that ran clear across the sheet.

There were perhaps twenty rows or so, and each row held about thirty
letters. They were carefully aligned and evenly spaced, and, without
doubt, contained a hidden message.

"I've unraveled a lot of cryptograms in my time," said Wise, "but this
isn't a cryptogram. I mean it isn't in cipher code,--there's some other
way of getting at it."

We all studied it. Olive, Zizi, Wise, and I bent our heads over the table
where it lay, while Mrs. Vail looked on from a little distance, and
babbled about some man she knew once, who could solve secret writings.

Suddenly Zizi jumped up, and running around the table, viewed the paper
from the other side.

She cocked her funny little head sidewise, and then wagged it knowingly
as she took a few steps further and looked at the paper from another
angle. All round the table she went, and finally, with a murmur of
apology, took up the paper and held it laterally in front of her eager
eyes.

"Whee!" she crowed in an ecstasy of satisfaction; "I've got it! You have
to have a pattern to read it by."

"A pattern!" I repeated, blankly.

"Yep! A paper with holes in it,--a key-paper."

"Oh!" and Wise looked as if a light had burst upon him. "That's it, Ziz!
You're the wonder-child, after all! Stoo-pid! Stoo-pid!" and he beat his
forehead in self-abasement. "And, oh! I say, Brice, what did you tell me
once about Swiss cheese?"

"Swiss cheese?"

"Yes; don't you remember? A carriage-call check--with holes in it."

"Oh, that thing. Yes; it was on Mr. Gately's desk,--Hudson, the foxy
detective, took it."

"Can we get it?"

"Of course, by sending for it."

"I'll go!" cried Zizi; "where? Headquarters?" and she was already
flinging on her coat.

"Let her go," said Wise, giving the girl a quick, appreciative glance.
"She'll beat any other messenger, and she'll find it."

We heard Zizi's imperative little voice demanding a cab from the
telephone, and a bit later heard the street door close behind her.

"You see," and Wise explained it to us, "Zizi noticed,--and then I
did,--these letters. At first glance they seem to be perfectly regular,
but noted closely there are some, here and there, that are a microscopic
fraction of space nearer or farther away from others. And that shows what
kind of a cipher it is. We may be mistaken about the carriage check, but
I truly believe when we get it we can read the message this paper
carries. We certainly can't without it."

This was so true that we laid the paper aside until the return of our
winged Mercury.

She came soon, and waved triumphantly the perforated card she had gone in
quest of.

"Here you are!" she cried; "let me try it as a reward for getting it."

"All right, go to it," said Wise, and flinging off her cape, Zizi bent
over the puzzle.

"It's it! It's it!" she cried, exultantly. "See, oh, Wise One!"

The detective took the paper and the card.

"You see," he said, generously sharing the first sight of the solution
with us, "this card has seven holes, at irregular distances. By placing
it in the right position on this solid bank of letters, certain ones show
through the holes, and these,--I hope,--will spell the message."

And it did. After re-adjusting the key card several times, Wise finally
got it right, and the letters that could be seen through the holes in
this card, as he moved it along, spelled coherent words and sentences. Of
course, the other letters were not to be used.

He read the message aloud, and as we suspected, it was information
concerning the shipment of munitions, and told of certain sailing dates.

"Spy work of the cleverest type," Wise exclaimed; "you see, 'The Link'
got her information from stolen telegrams, and recorded it in this way,
so it would be unintelligible to anyone not having this card,--or a
duplicate of it."

I scrutinized with interest the letters as they showed clearly through
the little round holes.

"The information is of no particular value now," Wise said; "it refers to
yesterday as the sailing date. The point is, that this card,--this key
card, was found on----"

He paused: a glance at Olive's agonized face stopped the words he would
have uttered. But we all knew. That card, found on Amos Gately's desk, or
in his desk drawer, proved that he was implicated in the interception of
these messages, that he was guilty of treason to his country!

Wise tried to help matters by saying, hastily, "Perhaps it was a plant!
Perhaps this card was put where it was found by some sly scoundrel for
the purpose of misleading----"

"Don't!" said Olive, faintly; "you are kind, Mr. Wise, but you are saying
that merely to give me a ray of comfort and hope. You know better. You
believe,--and I fear I must believe,--my guardian was involved in some
wrong, some grave wrong--and----"

She broke down utterly and sobbed in Zizi's arms which were opened to
receive her.

Feeling that our further stay was an intrusion, Rivers and I took leave,
and Wise came along with us. We three went down to my rooms, and
continued our confab without the embarrassment of Olive's presence.

"It's clearing itself up pretty quickly in some respects," Wise said as
he settled himself with a cigar, and passed the box to Rivers. "I'm not
so surprised as some at Gately's perfidy. It seems the Government has
been onto him for some time,--at least, they suspected him, and were
secretly investigating his private affairs. That Sadie person----"

"By the way, Wise," I interrupted him, "you sized her up perfectly! Did
you ever hear about that, Rivers? Mr. Wise saw only the girl's hatpin,
and from it he drew an exact portrait of 'The Link' herself. How did you
do it, Wise? Tell us the details."

"Like all those deductions it was simpler than it sounded," the detective
said, smiling. "You see, Mr. Rivers, the head of the pin was a big
good-looking scarab. I don't know yet whether it was a real one, but if
not it was a first-class imitation. This argued a person of education and
taste. The average young woman doesn't lean toward scarabs. Then, there
was a short bit of a human hair caught in the setting. This was black,
rather coarse, and strong, denoting a healthy, buxom brunette. Hair is a
clear indication of physical appearance, as a rule. That's how I know you
aren't Amory Manning," he broke off suddenly and looked at Case Rivers.
"I've had his description from Miss Raynor and from Brice, here, and they
agree that Manning had dark, heavy hair, rather--footballish type. Yours
is light, fine, and a little scant. And you have all the characteristics
that belong to it. Oh, yes, I admit I've been trying to fasten Manning's
identity on you, but without success."

"Don't apologize," laughed Rivers, "I've been trying to connect up with
the missing Manning myself, but I can't work it. So, I'm out for the
reward for finding that elusive individual. But I fear he's gone beyond
recall."

"By the way," Wise put in, "I've found out who offers the reward. And, if
you please, it's none other than the United States Government!"

"Why?" Rivers asked, interestedly.

"Well, it seems Manning is,--or was,--a Secret Service man and he was set
on the trail of Amos Gately. He worked secretly, of course, and----"

"And he was kidnaped by Gately's friends!" I cried; "by some of Rodman's
underlings, and put out of the way! I don't believe Manning is alive!"

"Go on about the hatpin, Mr. Wise, won't you?" urged Rivers. "I think I'm
going to grow up to be a detective and I'm taking notes."

"Well," said Wise, good-humoredly, "as I remember it, I mentioned the
lady's good teeth. This, because the prints on the rather soft gold of
the pin were straight and even."

"You said she was proud of them," I put in.

"A glittering generality," and Wise laughed. "Aren't all girls proud of
good teeth? Also, I assumed she had rather flashy tastes, for the scarab,
large, and of a bright greenish-blue color, was not a quiet affair. A
strong perfume clung to it, which also indicated a certain lack of
refinement."

"And you said untidy habits," I reminded him.

"Because the pin was bent to a real crookedness. Also, it had been broken
and mended. The break proving probable carelessness, and the mending
seemed to me to show that she was sentimentally fond of it, for it was
skilfully mended and the cost of that would have bought a new one, I
should judge. I assumed her to be somewhat intellectual to care so much
for a scarab, and I deduced her fairly well off to own and to care for
the rather valuable trinket. None of these deductions amounted to much by
itself, but the combination helped us to find a way to look for the
owner. Of course, the cigarette stubs and the powder-paper helped, too.
In fact, Miss Kent left pretty strong evidences of her call on Mr.
Gately. But,--she didn't kill him. Now, who did? We are learning lots of
things, but not one shred of evidence have we yet found against any
individual as the actual murderer."

"No," I agreed. "You see, the shadow of the head that I saw on the glass
door couldn't have been Rodman's."

"And so it may have been anybody's. I mean, it shows that heads look
pretty much alike, when merely shadowed on a thick, waved glass."

"Yes," I mused, "it may have been anybody's. But whose? It seems as if we
ought to have a suspect by this time."

"I'll get you a suspect," spoke up Case Rivers. "I'm going into this
thing for all I'm worth. The way lies through the Rodman crowd. 'The
Link' sold her information to Rodman and he took it to Gately, but of
late, 'The Link' became more bold and went straight to Gately herself.
Now, there must be others concerned, and an interview with Miss Kent
would give us an inkling of who they are. She's lost some of her bravado,
by this time, I've no doubt, and I'm going to chase her up. Then, too, I
want to go to Mr. Gately's office. I've never been there yet! Don't
think, Wise, that I'm butting in on your game, but sometimes two heads
are better than one, if one is a nameless wanderer on the face of the
earth."

"All right, Rivers," and Wise nodded genially, "go in and win. We're
together on this matter. And when it's over, I'm going to take up _your_
case, and see just how, when, and where you fell through the earth."

"I wish you would," and Rivers looked earnestly at the detective, "for I
see that trip every night in my dreams. I see myself falling through--oh,
I won't bore you with that same old story!"

"It doesn't bore me, but just now we'll put all our energies on the
present puzzle. We must get Gately's murderer, and then we must get Amory
Manning."

"Zizi says----" I began.

"I know she does," returned Wise, looking thoughtful. "Zizi says Manning
is the murderer. But the kid has no reason to say it but a hunch. She's a
witch though for hunches, and I keep her idea in mind."

"No," and Rivers spoke positively, "it doesn't seem to me that Manning is
the murderer. If he was in the Secret Service, he may be purposely in
hiding now, for some reason entirely unconnected with Amos Gately's
murder."

"Very likely," assented Wise. "Only, as I say, I often remember Zizi's
notions because they so often pan out correct."

"She's a marvel, that child," said Rivers; "where'd you get her?"

"She's my model. In civilian life, I'm by way of being an artist, you
know. I sketch her over and over, but never have I successfully caught
her smile. She's a witch child, a sprite."

"Yes; she seems gypsy born. But clever! And of a charm."

"All that," agreed Wise. "And a good little thing. Devoted to me, like a
faithful dog, and yet, absolutely impersonal. Oh, I couldn't get along at
all without Ziz."

And almost as he spoke the door opened and Zizi came gliding in. Her mode
of entering a room was one of her individual characteristics. She slid in
softly and unobtrusively, yet one was at once aware of her. It seemed to
electrify the atmosphere, and the place was brighter and more vital in
feeling. She moved across the room as quietly as a shadow, she said no
word, yet her whole presence spoke.

"Hello, Ziz," and Wise smiled at her. "Watcha want?"

"Mr. Rivers," she replied, flashing her black eyes at him. "Miss Olive
sent me. And she wants the other crystal."

"A new mystery?" and Wise laughed. "I can't see through the other
crystal! Has it to do with a pair of glasses?"

"No," and Rivers took out a pocket-book, from which he extracted some
flimsy paper. These proved to be tracings of snow crystals similar to
those I had seen him drawing while he was still in the hospital.

"How lovely!" Zizi exclaimed, as she took the traced patterns. "You see,"
and she showed them to Wise, "Miss Olive is making lace work,--and Mr.
Rivers makes her these patterns. Aren't they exquisite?"

They were. They were forms of snow crystals, than which there is nothing
more beautiful, and Rivers had adapted and combined them into a delicate
lace-like pattern, which Olive was to copy with linen threads, or
whatever women use to make lace out of.

"I was going to take them round," Rivers said; "I hope the delay hasn't
bothered Miss Raynor."

"Oh, no," Zizi assured him, "but she is impatient to see this new design
and couldn't wait. So I offered to run down for it. I knew you were
here."

"But I'm just going up to Miss Raynor's," Rivers spoke as if
disappointed, "and the patterns are my only excuse for a call! So, if you
please, Miss Zizi, I'll take them to the impatient lady, and I'll go at
once."

"I think she's gone out, Mr. Rivers, she was about to go as I left. If
you telephone you'll likely catch her."

Quite unembarrassed at our knowing smiles, Rivers took up my
desk-telephone and called Olive's number. While waiting for the response
he picked up a pencil from my pen-tray, and idly drew a snow crystal on
the big desk-blotter.

I watched him, for his skill fascinated me. He drew the dainty six-sided
figure with the accuracy of a designer. The tiny fronds, all six alike,
made a lovely hexagonal form as it grew beneath his fingers.

He was apparently unconscious of what he was doing, and drew without
thinking, for he spoke to us several times while waiting for the desired
connection.

At last Olive answered him, and he dropped the pencil and talked to her.
In a wheedlesome mood, he persuaded her to defer her proposed errand
until he could join her and he would accompany her. The kindly
familiarity with which he carried on the conversation and the jaunty
assurance he showed that she would accede to his request proved to us,
listeners perforce, that there was good comradeship between them.

Rivers hung up the receiver, and turned to me with a boyish smile. "I'm
going now," he said, "Miss Raynor is waiting for me. I'll see you again,
tonight, Brice." And with a general nod of farewell he went off.

Zizi sat staring at my desk.

The strange child was thinking of something,--more, she had made a
discovery, or had sensed some new information.

She leaned over the desk, her outstretched hands resting on the big
blotter and her black eyes wide with an expression of surprised fear.

"Look!" she cried; "look!"

But her slender finger pointed only to the snow crystal that Rivers had
drawn. It was a graceful figure, not quite finished, but a delicate
tracery of one of the myriad forms that snow crystals show. How often I
had looked at the lovely things as they rested for a moment on my dark
coat sleeve when I was out in a snowstorm. And after seeing Rivers draw
them so skilfully, several times, they had taken on a new interest to me.
But what had so moved Zizi I could not imagine. It was as if the little
drawing were fraught with some dreadful significance of which I knew
nothing.

Nor was Pennington Wise any more aware than I of the girl's meaning.

He smiled quizzically, and said, "Well, Zizi, girl, what's hypnotizing
you? That drawing of Rivers'?"

"Yes," and Zizi turned her big black eyes from my face to Wise's, and
gave a queer little sigh.

"Out with it, girlie," urged Wise. "Tell your old Penny Wise what's the
matter."

"Will you do what I want?" she asked, her voice tense and thrilled with
strong feeling.

"Yes; to the limit."

"Then look at that thing! That snow crystal!"

"Yes, I've looked," and after a moment's close scrutiny Wise turned his
eyes again to the eerie face, so vividly emotional, so white with that
unnamed fear.

"You look, too, Mr. Brice," and I did.

"Note the design," Zizi went on, "see just how the fronds are marked.
Isn't it funny how people always draw or scribble while they're waiting
to get a telephone call?"

"Oh, come now, Ziz," and Penny Wise patted her arm, "you're putting up a
game on us. We know Rivers draws these things beautifully. Why act as if
you never knew it before?"

"Come with me," and Zizi rose and began to put her long black cloak round
her, shivering with excitement as she did so. "You come, too, Mr. Brice."

We obeyed the strange child, for I remembered how Pennington Wise
respected what he called her "hunches," and before going downstairs she
directed that I call a taxicab.

In the cab she said nothing, having already bade us go to Amos Gately's
office, and arrange to get into the rooms.

And then, when we were there, when I had obtained the keys from the bank
people and had entered the dim, quiet rooms, Zizi went straight to the
middle room, straight to Amos Gately's desk, and lifting the telephone
from where it stood on the big desk-blotter, she disclosed the exact
counterpart of the snow crystal we had seen drawn at my desk by Case
Rivers!




                              CHAPTER XVI
                             The Snowflake


I looked at the design with interest, but without at first grasping its
true significance.

Pennington Wise looked at it aghast. "Where did it come from?" he
exclaimed.

"It's always been there," said Zizi. "I mean, I saw it there one day when
I was in this room with Mr. Hudson, I--I----"

"Didn't know you'd ever been here, Ziz," and Wise smiled at the earnest
little face.

"Yep, I was; and I happened to move the telephone, and under it was that
drawing. I didn't think anything about it, as evidence, but I looked at
it 'cause it was so pretty. And I put the telephone back over it again."

"But I searched this room," and Wise looked mystified.

"You probably didn't lift the telephone, then," Zizi returned, shaking
her elfin head, while a deep sorrow showed in her black eyes.

"I don't believe I did," Wise mused, thinking back. "I did pick up most
of the desk fittings to examine them but I suppose I didn't take hold of
the telephone at all."

"'Course not!" Zizi was always ready to defend Wise's actions. "How could
you know there was a picture under it? But, oh, Penny, what does it
mean?"

"Wait,--let's get at it carefully. On the face of it, it would seem as if
Case Rivers must have drawn this figure of a snow crystal. Everybody has
some peculiar habit, and especially, lots of people have a habit of
drawing some particular thing when waiting at a telephone.

"I've asked half a dozen men of late, and every one says he scribbles
words or draws some crude combination of lines. But each one says he
always does the same thing, whatever it may be. Now, I imagine, very few
men draw snow crystals,--and fewer still, draw them with this degree of
perfection. Again, granting they did, would any other individual draw
this identical design, with this accuracy of drawing, that Case Rivers
drew on the desk-blotter at your house, Brice?"

"I should say it would be impossible that anyone else could have done
it," I replied, honestly, though I began to see where our investigation
was leading us.

"It _is_ impossible," declared Wise. "Two men might draw snow crystals,
but they would not both choose this particular one."

"It's exactly the same," Zizi murmured, "for I brought Mr. Brice's with
me: here it is."

Calmly the girl took from her little hand-bag a piece torn from my
desk-blotter. It held the drawing done by Rivers while he was waiting for
his telephone call and it was the precise duplicate of the figure drawn
on the blotter of Amos Gately's mahogany desk.

"The same pencil--or, rather, the same hand drew those two," Wise said,
positively, and I could not contradict this.

Snow crystals are said by scientists to show hundreds of different
shapes, and almost any illustrated dictionary or text-book of natural
science shows several specimens. This one we were looking at was of
simple but beautiful design and I felt sure Rivers had copied it from
some picture as one can rarely keep a real snowflake long enough to copy
its form.

Anyway it was stretching the law of coincidence a little too far to
believe that two men would idly draw the same form on a desk-blotter
while telephoning.

Of course, this sketch on Amos Gately's desk need not have been made
while the artist's other hand held the telephone receiver, but its
juxtaposition to the instrument indicated that it was.

"Of course, Mr. Rivers drew this," Zizi declared, her little head bobbing
as she turned her black eyes from one of us to the other.

She wore a small turban made entirely of red feathers,--soft breast
feathers of some tropical bird, I suppose. The hat set jauntily on her
sleek black hair, and the motions of her head were so quick and birdlike,
that she gave me a fleeting remembrance of the human birds I saw in the
play of _Chantecler_.

"Of course he did," assented Wise, very gravely; "and now we must go on.
Granting, for the moment, that Case Rivers,--as we call him,--drew this
little sketch, he must have been in this office the day of Amos Gately's
murder. For I've been told that the blotter on this desk was changed
every day, and any marks or blots now on it were therefore made on that
day. If he did it, then,--or, rather, when he did it, he was telephoning
to somebody----"

"Well," put in Zizi, "perhaps he was just sitting here, talking to Mr.
Gately. Maybe, he might draw those things when he just sits idly as well
as when he telephones."

"Yes; you're right. Well, at any rate, he must have been sitting here,
opposite Mr. Gately, on that very day. And I opine he was telephoning,
but that makes no difference. Now, if he was here, in this office, on
that day,--what was he here for, and who is he?"

"He is the murderer," said Zizi, but she spoke as if she were a machine.
The words seemed to come from her lips without her own volition; her
voice was wooden, mechanical, and her eyes had a far-away, vacant gaze.
"I don't know who he is, but he is the man who shot Mr. Gately."

"Oh, come, now, Ziz," Wise shook her gently, "wake up! Don't jump at
conclusions. He may be the most innocent man in New York. He may have
been in here calling on Gately early in the day, and his errand may have
been of the most casual sort. He may have had cause to telephone, and as
he sat waiting for his call, he sketched the snowflake pattern, which is
his habit when waiting. But that he was here that day is a positive
fact,--to my mind. Now, it's for us to find out what he was here for, and
who he is. I don't favor going to him and asking him pointblank. That
peculiar phase of amnesia from which he is suffering is a precarious
matter to deal with. A sudden shock might bring back his memory,--or, it
might----"

"Addle his brain!" completed Zizi. "All right, oh, Most Wise Guy! But
when you do find out the truth, it will be that Case Rivers in his right
mind and in his own proper person killed Mr. Gately."

"Hush up, Ziz! If you have such a fearful hunch keep it to yourself. I'm
not going to believe that, unless I have to! It has always been my
conviction that Rivers is,--or was, a worthwhile man. I feel sure he was
of importance in some line,--some big line. Moreover, I believe his yarn
about falling through the earth."

"You do!" I cried, in amazement. "You stand for that! You believe he fell
into the globe at Canada,--or some Northern country, and fell out again
in New York City?"

"Not quite that," and Wise smiled. "But I believe he had some mighty
strange experience, of which his tale is a pretty fair description, if
not entirely the literal truth."

"Such as?"

"Why, suppose he fell down a mine shaft in Canada. Suppose that knocked
out his memory. Then suppose he was rescued and sent to New York for
treatment, say, at some private hospital or sanitarium. Then suppose he
escaped, and, still loony, threw himself into the East River--oh, I don't
know--only, there are lots of ways that he could have that notion about
his fall through the earth, and have something real to base it on."

"Gammon and spinach!" I remarked, my patience exhausted; "the man had a
blow or a fall or something that jarred his memory, but his 'falling
through the earth' idea is a hallucination, pure and simple. However,
that doesn't matter. Now we must follow this new trail, and see if we can
get a line on his personality. He can't tell us what he was here for,--if
he doesn't remember that he was here."

"Perhaps he does remember," Wise spoke musingly.

"Nixy!" and Zizi's saucy head nodded positively; "Mr. Rivers is sincere
now, whatever he was before. He doesn't remember shooting Mr. Gately----"

"Stop that, Zizi!" Wise spoke more sharply than I had ever heard him. "I
forbid you to assume that Rivers is the murderer,--you are absurd!"

"But I've got a hunch--" Zizi's black eyes stared fixedly at Wise,
"and----"

"Keep your hunch to yourself! I told you that before! Now, hush up."

Not at all abashed, Zizi made a most wicked little _moue_ at him, but she
said no more just then.

"We have a new direction in which to look, though," Wise went on, "and we
must get about it. You remember, we found a hatpin here that led us to
Sadie, 'The Link,' as straight as a signboard could have done."

"Yes," scoffed Zizi, "with the help of Norah and her powder-paper, and
Jenny and her tattle-tongue!"

"All right," Wise was unperturbed; "we got her all the same. Now, perhaps
the Man Who Fell Through the Earth also left some indicative clews. Let's
look round."

"He couldn't leave anything more indicative than the drawing on the
blotter," persisted Zizi. "He drew on Mr. Brice's blotter today and he
drew on this blotter of Mr. Gately's the day Mr. Gately was killed. That
much is certain."

"So it is, Zizi," agreed Wise; "but nothing further is certain as yet.
But we may find something more."

As he talked the detective rummaged in the desk drawers. He pulled out
the packet of papers that had interested him before.

"I'd like to read these," he said; "you see, they're dated in
chronological order, and they must mean something."

"It's where they come from," said Zizi, with an air of wisdom; "you see,
Waldorf means a certain message in their code book, and St. Regis means
another; Biltmore paper means another, and so on."

"Right you are, as usual," Wise said, so approvingly that Zizi smiled all
over her queer little countenance.

"Part of 'The Link's' spy business," she went on, and I cried out in
denial.

"Oh, come off, Mr. Brice," she said, "you may as well admit, first as
last, that you know Mr. Gately was mixed up in this spy racket. I don't
know yet just how deeply or how knowingly----"

"You mean," I caught at the straw, "that he was a go-between, but didn't
know it?"

"I thought that at first," said Wise, "I hoped it was so. That, of
course, would argue that he was infatuated with Sadie and she wound him
round her finger and used him to further her schemes, while he himself
was innocent. But the theory, though a pretty one, won't work. Gately
wasn't quite gullible enough for that, and, too, he is more deeply
concerned in it all than we know."

"Yes," I agreed; "these letters,--I mean, these blank sheets,--were sent
to him by mail. One came the day after he died."

"I know it. And, as Zizi says, they mean something definite in accordance
with a prepared code. For instance, a sheet of Hotel Gotham paper, dated
December tenth, might mean that a certain transport, indicated in the
code book by that hotel, was to sail on that date."

"That's a simple, child's-play explanation," said Zizi,--"but it may be
the right one."

"Certainly," Wise assented, "there may be other explanations and more
complicated ones. But it doesn't matter now. The receipt of these
letters,--blank letters,--was of secret value to Gately, and proves him
to have been pretty deeply mixed up in it all."

"But what about Mr. Rivers?" spoke up Zizi; "where does he come in?"

"It looks black," Wise declared. "He was here that day secretly. That is,
he didn't come in at Jenny's door. She doesn't recognize him, I asked
her. Therefore, he came in by one of these other doors, or up in the
secret elevator. In either case, he didn't want his visit known. So he is
a wrongdoer, with Gately, and--probably, with Rodman. They're all tarred
with the same brush. The trail of the spy serpent is over them all."

"No!" cried Zizi, and her face was stormy, "my nice Mr. Rivers isn't any
spy! He hasn't anything to do with that spy matter!"

"Why!" I exclaimed; "you said he was the murderer!"

"Well, I'd rather be a murderer than a spy!" Her eyes snapped and her
whole thin little body quivered with indignation. "A murder is a decent
crime compared to spy work! Oh, my nice Mr. Rivers!"

She broke down and cried convulsively.

"Let her alone," said Wise, not unkindly, after a brief glance at the
shaking little figure. "She's always better for a crying spell. It clears
her atmosphere. Now, Brice, let's get busy. As Zizi says, you must admit
that there's no doubt that Amos Gately was pretty deeply into the game.
Even if he was unduly friendly with Sadie Kent, it was indubitably
through and because of their dealings together in the stolen telegram
business. The way I see it is that Sadie sold her intercepted messages to
the highest bidder. This was George Rodman, but above him was Amos
Gately. Oh, don't look so incredulous. It isn't the first time a bank
president has gone wrong on the side. Gately never was unfaithful to his
office, he never misappropriated funds or anything of that sort, but for
some reason or other, whether money gain, or hope of other reward, he did
betray his country."

I couldn't deny it,--or, rather, I could deny it, but only because of my
still unshattered faith in Amos Gately. I could bring no proof of my
denial.

"But," I said, musingly, "we haven't yet proved Gately mixed up in----"

"What!" cried Wise; "isn't this enough proof? These blank letters, for
that's what they are,--the proved visit here of Sadie, 'The Link,' and
the fact that Gately was shot,--by someone,--with no known reason,--all
that goes to show that the murderer had some secret motive, some unknown
cause for getting Gately out of the way."

"I see it, as you put it," I said, "but I will not believe Amos Gately a
spy,--or conniving at spy business until I have to. I shall continue to
believe he was a tool--an innocent tool--of the Rodman and Sadie Kent
combination."

"All right, Brice, keep your faith as long as you can, but, I tell you,
you'll soon have to admit that I'm right. Gately, as we all know, was a
peculiar man. He had few friends, he had little or no social life, and he
did have secret callers and a secret mode of entrance and exit from his
offices. All this shows something to hide,--it is unexplainable for a man
who has nothing to conceal."

"All right, Wise," I said, finally, "I suppose you _are_ right. But still
we must continue our search for the murderer. We don't seem to progress
much in that matter."

"Not yet, but soon," Wise said, optimistically; "the ax is laid at the
root of the tree,--we are on the right track----"

"Meaning Case Rivers?" I cried, in alarm.

"Meaning Case Rivers,--perhaps," he returned. "I'm not as sure as Zizi is
that the evidence points to him as the murderer, but we must conclude
that he was in this room the day of the murder,--and what else could he
have been here for?"

"What else?" I stormed. "Dozens of things! Hundreds of things! Why, man
alive, every person who set foot in this room on that day didn't
necessarily kill Amos Gately!"

"Every person who set foot in this room on that day is his potential
murderer," Wise returned, calmly. "Every person must be suspected,--or,
at least, investigated."

"Well," I said, after realizing that he spoke truly, "you investigate the
question of Rivers' visit here that day. I don't want to do that. But I'm
going down to Headquarters now, and perhaps I'll dig up something of
importance."

And I did. A visit to the Chief told me the interesting tale of the
further discoveries of Sadie Kent's industries. It seems the Federal
agents had found a complete and powerful wireless station in a cottage at
Southeast Beach, a fairly popular summer resort. The cottage was
seemingly untenanted, but some unexplained wires which ran along the
rafters of an adjoining house led to the discovery of the auxiliary
wireless station.

Experts had broken into the locked house and had found a cleverly
concealed keyboard of a wireless apparatus. Further search had disclosed
the whole thing, and, moreover, had brought out the fact, that the
adjoining cottage was occupied by two apparently innocent old people, who
were really in the employ of Sadie Kent.

"The Link" was a person of importance, and though she passed for a mere
telegraph operator, she was one of the most important links in the German
spy system in the United States.

In the room where the wireless apparatus was found there were also
quantities of letter paper from the various hotels of New York City.

These sheets, abstracted from the writing-rooms of the hotels, were the
code system used in forwarding the stolen intelligence.

It all hung together, and the bunch of those hotel papers found in
Gately's desk, and especially the fact that one reached his address the
day after his demise proved, beyond all doubt, his implication in the
despicable business.

Now, I thought, to what extent or in what way was Case Rivers concerned?
Surely the man had been in Gately's office on that fatal day. I had no
idea that he had killed the banker,--that was only Zizi's
foolishness,--but he had certainly been there.

It came to me suddenly that if Rivers could be taken again to the Gately
offices, the rooms, the associations, might possibly bring back his lost
memory, and let him reinstate himself in his real personality. To be
sure, this might prove him the murderer, but if so, it would be only the
course of justice; and, on the other hand, if it explained his innocent
or casual call on Gately that, too, was what the man deserved.

And so I went at once to see Rivers. I found him in his rooms, the ones
he had taken while he was to assist Wise in his work, and he greeted me
cordially.

"The plot thickens," he said as I told him of Sadie's wireless station.
"I knew that girl was a sly one. She's one of the most important people
in the big spy web. She's one of their spyders, who spin a pretty web and
attract gullible flies. Amos Gately fell for her charms,--you know,
Brice, she is a siren,--and somehow she lured him into the web she so
deftly spun. To my mind, Gately was a good, upright citizen, who fell for
a woman's wiles. I'm not sure about this, it may be he was mixed up in
spy work before Sadie came on the scene,--but I'm certain she was
accessory before, during, or after the fact."

"Accessory to his murder?" I asked.

"Not necessarily; but strongly accessory to his wrongdoing in the matter
of treason. I think she, for a time, worked Gately through Rodman, but,
latterly, she grew bolder or found she could do more by personal visits
and she came and went by the secret elevator, pretty much as she chose."

"I hate to have Miss Raynor know this," I said with a covert glance at
Rivers, to see how he took the remark.

"So do I," he said, as frankly as a boy; "I may as well tell you, Brice,
that I love that girl. She is, to me, the very crown of womanhood. I have
worshiped her from the first moment I saw her. But, understand, I have no
hopes,--no aspirations. I shall never offer my hand and heart to any
woman while I have no name to offer. And I shall never have a name. If I
haven't yet discovered my own identity I never can. No, I'm no pessimist,
and I know that some time some sudden shock might restore my memory all
in a minute, yet I can't bank on such a possibility. I've talked this
over with Rankin,--he's the doctor who's following up my case,--time and
again. He says that a sudden and very forcible shock is needed to restore
my memory, and that it may come and--it may not. He says it can't be
forced or brought about knowingly,--it will have to be a coincidence,--a
happening that will jar the inert cells of my brain--or, something like
that,--I don't remember the scientific terms."

Rivers passed his hand wearily across his forehead.

I was in a quandary. I had gone to see the man with full purpose of
luring him to Gately's office and confronting him with the sketched
snowflake on the blotting-pad. Now, since he had confided to me his love
for Olive Raynor, I shrank from doing anything that might prove him to be
Amos Gately's murderer. For I was fond of Miss Raynor, in a deeply
respectful and unpresumptuous fashion. And I had noticed several things
of late that made me feel pretty sure that her friendship for Rivers was
true and deep, if indeed it were not something more than friendship.
This, to be sure, would argue but a fickle loyalty to the memory of Amory
Manning, but as Norah and I agreed, when talking it over, Miss Raynor had
never shown any desperate grief at Manning's disappearance,--at least,
not more than the loss of a casual friend might arouse.

But I knew where my duty lay. And so I said, "Rivers, I wish you'd go
round to Mr. Gately's office with me. Don't you think that if you were
there,--and you never have been,--you might chance upon some clew that
has escaped the notice of Wise or Hudson or myself?"

"Righto!" he said; "I've thought myself I'd like to go there. Not, as you
politely suggest, to find overlooked clews, but just as a matter of
general interest. I'm out, you know, to find the murderer, and also to
trace the vanished Amory Manning."




                              CHAPTER XVII
                              Zizi's Hunch


"He's afraid," and Norah wagged her head sagaciously, while her gray eyes
had an apprehensive expression.

"Afraid of what?"

"Afraid of the truth. You see, Mr. Brice, our friend Rivers is nobody's
fool. He's onto most points regarding this case, and now, he's getting
onto himself. That astute little scrap of humanity, Zizi, knows he is. Of
course, living with Miss Raynor, as she does, she has opportunities every
day to see Mr. Rivers, for he's eternally hanging around the Raynor
house. Oh, I don't mean he's an idler; not by a long shot. On the
contrary, his middle name is efficiency! He puts over a lot of work in a
day."

"What sort of work and how do you know so much about him?"

We were in my office, waiting for Rivers, who had promised to come to see
me, and to look into the Gately rooms. It was now nearly half an hour
after the time he had set for his call, and as it was not his habit to be
tardy, I was surprised. I had begun to look upon Rivers as a man of
importance, not only in the matters with which we were associated, but he
showed so much general ability and force of character that I wondered who
or what he would turn out to be. For I felt sure he would find himself,
and even if he never discovered who he had been he would make a new name
and a well worthwhile individuality for himself yet.

Norah, too, admired him, and seemed to know as much of his capabilities,
or more, than I did myself.

"I don't know just what sort of work, but I think it's connected with the
mysteries we're up against ourselves. And I know about him, because Zizi
told me. She sees everything he does,--when she's with him, I mean. Not a
gesture or motion escapes her notice. And she's watching his attitude
toward Miss Raynor. She says,--Zizi does,--that Mr. Rivers is over head
and ears in love with Olive, but he won't tell her so because he is, as
he puts it, a self-named man! Zizi heard him call himself that when
talking to Miss Raynor, and then he just looked away, and resolutely
changed the subject. But she thinks,--Zizi does,--that he's working night
and day to find out who he is, and she's sure he'll find out. And also,
he's working to find Mr. Gately's murderer, and he's hunting for Amory
Manning. No wonder the man's busy!"

"Well, why is he afraid to come here?"

"I'm not sure that he is; but you know Zizi has a hunch that he's the
murderer, and I think maybe he is. That snowflake sketch proves he was
there that day and as his presence isn't accounted for, why may he not
have been the slayer? And, why may he not have an inkling or a suspicion
of it, and dread to verify his fears?"

"But, good gracious, Norah, even granting he was in Gately's office that
day, he needn't have done the shooting. There are about one million other
errands he could have been there on. Perhaps he was a commercial
traveler, selling laces, and drew the design for a sample."

"Sometimes, Mr. Brice, you talk like a Tom-noddy! Drummer, indeed! I can
tell you whatever calling Case Rivers followed, it was far different from
that of a selling agent! I'll bet he was a lawyer, at least!"

"At least!" I mocked her; "understand, pray, I consider my profession
somewhat above the least of the professions!"

"Yes, for _you_ dignify it to a high standing," and the gray eyes flashed
me the smile of appreciation that I was looking for. I may as well admit
that I was growing very fond of those two gray eyes and their owner, and
I had a pretty strong conviction that after the present case was all
settled I should turn my attention to the winning of the exclusive right
to the tender glances those eyes could give.

But just now, I had to exclude all distracting thoughts, and forcing my
mind back to the present situation, I again marveled at the
non-appearance of Case Rivers.

"Perhaps he's fallen through the earth again," Norah suggested; "by the
way, Mr. Brice, what do you think about that fall? Mr. Rivers is no doubt
under some strange hallucination, but all the same, may there not be some
foundation on which he based his dream?"

"Maybe! There must be! That mind of his is too sure-fire to hang on so
desperately to a mere dream. He had some experience of a strange nature,
and it included something that he looks upon as falling through the
earth."

"Such as?"

"I don't know. But I've a vague idea of a motor accident. Say, a motor
car ran into a stone wall, and he was hurled high in the air, and landed
in the East River----"

"But I don't see how that implies falling through the earth."

"Well, say he slid down a high bank to reach the river----"

"There's no high bank near the morgue, and he was fished out in that
locality."

"But he needn't have fallen in there! In fact, he couldn't have,--he must
have floated or drifted a considerable distance to have had his clothing
torn from him--and to have reached the state of exhaustion and freezing
that so nearly culminated in death."

"Yes, but even yet, you haven't suggested anything like falling through
the earth."

"All right, Miss Smarty, what's your idea? I see you're dying to spring
something."

"Only what I've thought from the beginning. I believe he was in some cold
country, Canada, or somewhere, and fell down through a mine shaft, or
into a deep old well, or perhaps merely an excavation for a new, large
building. But, anyway, whatever it was, his last impression was of
falling down into the ground. Then when he struck he was knocked
unconscious. Then, he was taken to a hospital, or somewhere, and as the
fall had utterly blotted out his memory, he was kept in confinement.
Then, somehow he broke loose and came to New York,--or, maybe, he was
brought to New York for treatment by the doctors and he got away and
either threw himself into the river or fell in accidentally, and when he
was rescued he still remembered the fall but nothing else concerning his
disaster."

"Good enough, Norah, as a theory. But seems to me, in that case, he would
have been sought and found by the people who had him in charge."

"Ah, that's the point of it all! They don't want to find him! They know
just where he is, and all about him, but they won't tell, for it suits
their base purposes to have him lost!"

"Well, you _have_ cooked up a scheme! And he killed Amos Gately?"

"Maybe, but if so, he did it unknowingly. Perhaps these people who are
looking after him, secretly hypnotized him to do it----"

"Oh, Norah! come off! desist! let up! Next thing you know you'll be
having him in the movies! For you never thought up all that stuff without
getting hints for it from some slapstick melodrama!"

"Oh, well, people who are absolutely without imagination can't expect to
see into a mystery! But, you won't see any Mr. Rivers _this_ morning,--I
can assure you of that!"

She turned to her typewriter, and I took up my telephone.

I could not get Rivers at his home address, and I next called up Miss
Raynor.

She replied, in agitated tones, that Rivers had been to see her for a few
minutes, and that he had left half an hour before. She begged me to come
around at once.

Of course, I went.

I found her in a strange state of mind. She seemed like one who had made
a discovery, and was fearful of inadvertently disclosing it.

But when I urged her to be frank, she insisted she had nothing to
conceal.

"I don't know anything, Mr. Brice, truly I don't," she repeated. "I mean,
anything new or anything that I haven't told you. Mr. Rivers was here
this morning for a very short call. He said that while his memory had not
returned, he had a queer mental impression of being on a search for a
paper when he fell through the earth."

"Did he go down into the earth to seek the paper?" I asked, thinking it
best to treat the matter lightly.

"No," she returned, in all seriousness, "but he believes he was
commissioned to hunt out a valuable paper, of some sort, and while on the
quest he fell through the earth, by accident. It was the shock of that
that impaired his memory."

"Sufficient cause!" I couldn't help saying.

Olive bristled: "Oh, I know you don't believe his story,--almost nobody
does,--but I do."

"So do I!" and Zizi was in the room. One could never say of that girl
that she entered or came in,--she just--was there,--in that silent,
mysterious way of hers. And then with equally invisible motions she was
sitting opposite me, at Olive's side, on a low ottoman.

"I know Mr. Rivers very well," Zizi announced, as if she were his
official sponsor, "and what he says is true, no matter how unbelievable
it may sound. He says he fell through the earth, and so he _did_ fall
through the earth, and that's all there is about _that_!"

"Good for you, Zizi!" I cried. "You're a loyal little champion! And just
how did he accomplish the feat?"

"It will be explained in due season," and Zizi's big black eyes took on a
sibylline expression as she gazed straight at me. "If you were told, on
good authority, that a man had crossed the ocean in an aeroplane, you'd
believe it, wouldn't you?"

"Yes; but that doesn't seem to me a parallel case," I demurred.

"Neither is Case Rivers a parallel case," Zizi giggled, "but he's the
real thing in the way of Earth Fallers. And when you know all, you'll
know everything!"

The child was exasperating in her foolish retorts and yet so convincing
was the determined shake of her little black head that I was almost
tempted to believe in her statements.

"You're a baby sphinx, Zizi," and Olive looked at her affectionately,
"but honestly, Mr. Brice, she keeps my spirits up, and she is so positive
herself of what she says that she almost convinces me. As for Mrs. Vail,
she swallows everything Zizi says for law and gospel!"

"And just what is it you say, now, Zizi?" I asked.

"Nothin' much, kind sir. Only that Case Rivers is a gentleman and a
scholar, that his memory is on the home stretch and humming along, and
that if he's after a paper,--he'll get it!"

"And, incidentally he's Amos Gately's----"

A scream of agony from Zizi interrupted my speech, and jumping to her
feet she danced round the room, her forefinger thrust between her red
lips, and her little, eerie face contorted as with pain.

"Oh, what is it, Zizi?" cried Olive, running to the frantic girl.

Mrs. Vail, hearing the turmoil, came running in, and she and Olive held
Zizi between them, begging to know how she was hurt.

Catching an opportunity, Zizi looked at me, over Mrs. Vail's shoulder,
and the message shot from her eyes was fully as understandable as if she
had spoken. It said, "Do not mention any hint of Case Rivers' possible
connection with the Gately murder, and do not mention the snowflake drawn
on the blotter in Mr. Gately's office."

Yes, quite a lengthy and comprehensive speech to be made without words,
but the speaking black eyes said it as clearly as lips could have done.

I nodded my obedience, and then Zizi giggled and with her inimitable
impudence, she turned to Olive, and said: "I'm like the White Queen, in
'Alice,' I haven't pricked my finger yet, but I probably shall, some
day."

"What were you screaming about, then?" asked Mrs. Vail, inclined to be
angry, while Olive looked amused and mystified.

"Emergency," and Zizi grinned at her. "First aid to the injured,--or,
rather, prevention, which is worth a pound of first aid!"

"You're crazy!" said Mrs. Vail, a little annoyed at being fooled so. "I
thought you were nearly killed!"

"When you knew a lady once who was nearly killed did she yell like that?"
asked Zizi, with an innocent smile.

"Yes!" exclaimed Mrs. Vail; "but how did you know I once saw a lady
nearly killed?"

"Mind-reading!" replied Zizi, and then Pennington Wise arrived, and we
all shamelessly ignored Mrs. Vail and her yarns to listen to his report.

"There's a lot doing," he said, "and," he added, gently, "I'm sorry to
bring you unpleasant news, Miss Raynor, but you'll have to know sooner or
later----"

"I do know," said Olive, bravely; "you're going to tell me my guardian
was--was not a good man."

"That is so; it is useless to try to soften the truth. Amos Gately was
the receiver of important Government secrets, learned by Sadie Kent, the
telegrapher. She carried them to Rodman, who in turn transmitted them to
Gately, who, it seems, had a way of getting the information to the enemy.
Of course, the secret wireless station, recently discovered, was used, as
well as other means of communication. I won't go into details, Miss
Raynor, but Amos Gately was the 'man higher up,' who thought himself safe
from discovery because of his unimpeachable reputation for integrity, and
also because of the infinite precautions he had taken. Indeed, if he had
not fallen a victim to the personal charms of 'The Link,' his share in
the wrong might never have been learned."

Olive listened to all this, white-faced and still,--her lips a tense,
drawn line of scarlet,--her expression a stony calm.

Zizi, watching her closely, and with loving care, slipped her little
brown paw into Olive's hand, and noted with satisfaction the faint
answering smile.

"Perhaps," Olive said, after a thoughtful pause, "it is as well, then,
that Uncle Amos did not--did not live to be--disgraced."

"It is," said Wise, gravely; "he would have faced a Federal prison had it
all been discovered while he lived. That will be Rodman's fate,--if he is
not held for the crime of murder. But I think he will not be. For his
alibi clears him and it was to escape the graver charge that he has told
so much of the spy business."

"And so," I said, "we are as far as ever from the discovery of the
murderer?"

"You never can tell," Wise returned; "it may be we are on the very eve of
solving the mystery. Rivers is on the warpath----"

"I think I ought to tell you, Mr. Wise," Olive broke in, "that Mr. Rivers
was here this morning, and he seems to have a slight glimmer of returning
memory."

"He has? Good! Then it will all come back to him. I've been looking up
this aphasia-amnesia business, and quite often when the patient begins to
recover his memory, it all comes back to him with a bang! Where is
Rivers?"

"He went away--I don't know where----" Olive's lips quivered, and so
plainly did she show her feelings that we all saw at once she feared that
Rivers had fled, _because_ of his returning memory.

"It's all right," declared Zizi, stanchly; "Mr. Rivers is white clear
through! He'll come back, soon, and he'll bring the paper he's after."

"What paper?" demanded Wise.

"The poipers! the poipers!" scoffed Zizi; "did you ever know a case, oh,
Wise Guy, that didn't revolve round and hinge on a poiper? Well, the
dockyments in the case is what he's a-soichin' for! See?"

When Zizi acted the _gamine_ she was irresistibly funny and we all
laughed, which was what she wanted to lighten the strain of the
situation.

Rivers was a mystery, indeed. Every one of us, I think, felt that he
might be connected with the Gately affair. All of us, that is, but
Olive,--and who could tell what she thought?

But Pennington Wise had a question to ask, and he put it
straightforwardly.

"That day you were lured to Sadie 'The Link's' house, Miss Raynor," he
began, "you said, or rather, you agreed when Rodman said you were his
_fiancée_. Will you tell us why?"

Olive flushed, but more with anger than embarrassment.

"The man threatened me," she said, "he first tried to make love to me,
and when I repulsed him, he told me that unless I would promise to marry
him he would tell something that would be a living reproach to the memory
of my dead guardian. I declared he could say nothing against Amos Gately.
Then he whispered that Mr. Gately was a spy! I couldn't believe it,
and--yet, I had seen just a few things,--had heard just a few words, that
filled my heart with a fear that Mr. Rodman was speaking the truth. So I
thought I'd better say what he asked me to, though I knew I'd kill myself
rather than ever marry him. But I wasn't greatly afraid, except that I
knew I was in his power. Oh, I don't like to think about that day!"

Olive broke down and hid her face in her hands, while Zizi's thin little
arms crept round her and held her close.

"Only one more query, Miss Raynor," and Wise spoke very gently; "are
you,--were you engaged to Amory Manning?"

Olive lifted her face, and spoke composedly: "No, Mr. Wise, I was never
engaged to him. We were good friends, and I think he had a high regard
for me, but no words of affection ever passed between us. I admire and
respect Mr. Manning as a friend, but that is all." And then a lovely
blush suffused Olive's face, followed quickly by a look of pain,--and we
knew she was thinking of Rivers, and his possible defection. Never have I
seen a woman's face so easy to read as Olive Raynor's. Perhaps because of
her pure, transparent character, for in my enforced intimacy with her, as
I managed her estate, I had learned that she was an exceptional nature,
high-minded, fine, and conscientious in all things.

"I cannot think," Olive went on, "that Mr. Manning will ever be found. I
think he has been killed."

"Why?" asked Wise, briefly.

"You know, he was a Secret Service man. Many times he has had the
narrowest escape with his life, and--I'm not sure of this,--but I think
now, he was on the track of the nest of spies with which my--with which
Mr. Gately was mixed up. A few slight incidents, otherwise unexplainable,
make this clear to me now, though I never suspected it before. My uncle
disliked Mr. Manning, and it may have been because he knew he was in the
Government's employ. And though I know Mr. Gately would never have moved
a finger to put Amory Manning out of the way, yet George Rodman may have
done so. Oh, it's all so mysterious, so complicated,--but of this I'm
sure, Case Rivers is in no way connected with the whole matter. He is a
man from some distant city, he is unacquainted in New York, and he----"
here Olive broke down utterly and fell into a hysterical burst of
weeping.

Zizi rose and gently urged Olive to go with her from the room.

A silence fell as the two girls disappeared. It was broken by Mrs. Vail,
who remarked, dolefully, "I do hope that nice Mr. Rivers will come back,
for dear Olive is _so_ in love with him."

"What!" cried Pennington Wise, "Miss Raynor in love with Rivers! That
will never do! Why, we've no idea who he is. He may be a fortune-hunter
of the lowest type!"

"Oh, no, no!" denied Mrs. Vail, "he is a most courteous gentleman."

"That doesn't count," stormed Wise; "although, perhaps, I spoke too
strongly just now when I called him names!"

"Especially as he has no name!" I put in; "in fact, he calls himself a
self-named man!"

Wise smiled: "He is a witty chap," he conceded, "and I like him
immensely. But it's up to us, Brice, to safeguard Miss Raynor's
interests, and a possible suitor for the hand of an heiress ought, at
least, to know his own ancestors! And then, again, unless he recovers his
memory and can deny it, there's a fair chance that he had some hand in
the Gately murder. We can't get away from that snowflake pattern drawn on
the blotter. Rivers was there, in that room, he sat at Gately's desk,
opposite Gately himself,--I mean, of course, this is the way I
reconstruct the matter,--and if he didn't shoot Gately then and there, at
least, we have no proof that he didn't."

"I think he did," I admitted, for Wise's statement of the matter was
convincing,--and beside, Norah thought so, too.

"Well, you think again!" came in a wild little voice, and there was Zizi
at my elbow fairly shaking her little clenched fist in my face. "Mr.
Badman Brice, you've got a lot of follow-up thinks a-coming to you, and
you'd better begin 'em right now!"

She looked like a little fury as she danced around my chair and exploded
the vials of her wrath. "That Mr. Rivers is a perfectly good man,--I
know! He and Miss Olive are in love,--but they don't hardly know it
themselves,--bless 'em! And Mr. Rivers he won't tell her, anyway, 'cause
he's a nobleman,--one of Nature's maybe,--and again, maybe he's a real
one from Canada, or wherever he hails from. But, anyway, he no more
killed anybody than I did!"

"All right, Ziz,--bully for you! As a loyal friend you're there with the
goods!" Wise smiled at her. "But after all, you've got only your loyalty
to bank on. You don't _know_ all this."

"I've got a hunch," said Zizi, pounding one little fist into the other
palm, "and when it comes to certainty,--Death and Taxes have nothing on
my hunches!"




                             CHAPTER XVIII
                            Clear as Crystal


"Hello, people! What's the matter, Zizi? I'll be on your side! Bank on
me, little one, to the last ditch. And, by jumping Jupiter, Brice, I
believe the last ditch is coming my way! No, I haven't got a
strangle-hold on that eloping memory of mine yet, but I 'ave 'opes. I've
had a glimmer of a gleam of a ray of light on my dark, mysterious past,
and I beflew myself straight to good little old Doctor Rankin, who's my
Trouble Man every time. And he says that it's the beginning of the end.
That any day, almost any hour now, I may burst forth a full-memoried and
properly christened citizen."

"Good for you, old chap," and thrilled at the elation in his tones, I
held out my hand. "Go in and win!"

"Oh, won't it be fine when you remember?" cried Mrs. Vail, wringing her
hands in excitement; "why, I knew a man once----"

"Yes," Rivers encouraged her, in his kindly way, "what happened to the
lucky chap?"

"Why, he was affected something as you are,--or, as you were----" but
Wise couldn't stand for what seemed likely to be a long story.

"Excuse me, Mrs. Vail," he interrupted her, "but, really, I must run away
now, and I want a word or two with Mr. Rivers first."

The good lady subsided, but it was plain to be seen she was disappointed.

"May I come in?" and a smiling Olive appeared in the doorway. "Am I
wanted?"

"Are you wanted?" the eager, hungry smile Rivers gave her was pathetic.
For it was so spontaneous, so gladly welcoming that it was as if a light
was suddenly extinguished when the man, on second thought, hid his real
feelings and advanced with a courteous but rather formal air.

"You're always wanted," he resumed, lightly, but the joy was gone from
his tones, and a mere friendly greeting resulted. Surely, he was a
gentleman, but he would make no advances while uncertain of his claim in
full to that title.

And then, he looked at her curiously, as if wondering whether she would
hold any place in his restored memory,--should the restoration really
occur.

It was Zizi who broke the silence that fell on us all.

"I want my way, Penny," she said, in such a wistful, pleading tone, that
I felt sure no breathing human heart could refuse her.

"What is your way, Zizi?" Wise said, gently.

"I want us all to go--all of us,--over to Mr. Gately's office----"

"Come ahead!" cried Rivers; "I promised old Brice, here, that I'd go this
very day, and I broke my appointment. Sorry, old man, but I had to see
Friend Doctor, on the jump. Let's go now, in accordance with the Witch's
whim, and we'll take the big wagon, and all go."

He often called Zizi the Witch, or the Elf-child, and she liked it from
him, though she usually resented any familiarity.

She smiled at him, but I noted an undercurrent of sadness in her gaze,
and I knew she was thinking of the evidence of the snow crystal.

For though Zizi liked Rivers a lot, and though she really had faith in
his innocence of wrongdoing, yet her whole fealty was to Pennington Wise,
and her hunch about the snowflake drawing might lead to disastrous
results in more ways than one.

Olive shrank from going to her guardian's office,--she had never been
there since the tragedy,--but a few whispered words from Zizi persuaded
her to agree to accompany us.

And to help matters, I told her that if she preferred not to go into Mr.
Gately's rooms, she could remain in my office with Norah, while we went.

Mrs. Vail insisted on being of the party, and ran briskly off to get her
bonnet.

The atmosphere seemed peculiarly charged with a feeling of impending
disaster, and yet, not one of us would have held back. Pennington Wise
was very grave and quiet; Zizi, on the other hand, was as one
electrified. She sprang about with quick, darting motions, she giggled
almost hysterically and then suddenly became most gentle and tender. She
ran for Olive's wraps herself, and bringing them, put them on with the
careful air of a mother dressing her child.

Olive, herself, was as one dazed. She, now and then, looked toward Rivers
with a shy, yet wistful glance, and he looked back with a big, hearty
smile that seemed to warm her very soul.

We piled into the big touring car and made a quick run to the Puritan
Building.

Then we all went to my office first. Norah did the honors as prettily as
any hostess in her own home, and her ready tact helped Olive to overcome
her dread of the place.

"Well," said Rivers, at last, "what are we waiting for? I thought we were
to go over to Mr. Gately's rooms. Perhaps Miss Raynor and Mrs. Vail would
prefer to stay here with Miss MacCormack."

"No," said Olive, firmly, "I want to go, too."

Norah looked at her uncertainly. Then, probably realizing that for Olive
to remain behind would be harder than to face whatever might happen, she
said, quite casually, "Very well, Miss Raynor, let us all go."

I think we were all imbued with a sense of fear, a sort of premonition
that the visit across the hall would be productive of grave results.

Rivers was the most light-hearted of the party, and yet I somehow felt
that his cheerfulness was forced.

"The keys, Brice?" he said; "oh, you have them. All right, my boy, go
ahead."

And then the same stillness that was on the rest of us fell on him, too,
and we entered the rooms in silence.

I went first, through Jenny's room, on to the middle room, and paused
just beyond the desk.

Rivers was next, but Zizi pushed her lithe little body through the group,
and came through the door just ahead of him.

Rivers entered with the strangest look I have ever seen on any human
face. It was a transition,--not sudden but gradual,--from the dark of
forgetfulness to the dawn of memory.

And then, just as he neared Amos Gately's desk, Zizi, without seeming
insistence,--indeed, without seeming intent,--guided him to the chair
opposite Mr. Gately's desk-chair.

Mechanically, almost unconsciously, Rivers dropped into the seat and sat
at the great table-desk,--just where, presumably, the slayer of Amos
Gately had sat.

With one of her sudden, swift motions, Zizi put the telephone receiver
into his left hand, which involuntarily opened to take it, and thus
exposed to view the snow crystal drawn on the blotter.

A dead silence fell on us all as Rivers sat there staring at the little
sketch. He fairly devoured it with his eyes, his face, meanwhile,
becoming set,--like a face of stone.

Then, raising his blank, staring eyes, his gaze sought out Olive and,
looking straight at her, he gave a low, piercing cry,--wrung from him as
from a soul in mortal agony,--and said:

"I killed Amos Gately!"

I think the scene that followed this announcement was the strangest I
have ever experienced. For myself, I felt a sudden sinking, as if the
bottom had fallen out of the universe. In fact, a whimsical idea flashed
through my stunned brain that I was "falling through the earth,"--or into
a bottomless pit.

The white faces that I looked at meant nothing to me,--I saw them as in a
dream, so dazed was my intelligence.

And then, they assumed their individuality and I saw that Olive's lovely
countenance was a complete blank; like me, she failed to grasp the full
meaning of Rivers' confession.

Mrs. Vail, her eyes closed, lay back limply in a chair, and groaned
audibly, while Norah buried her face in a nearby silken curtain and
sobbed.

Pennington Wise looked like a man who has just heard the worst,--but who
expected it. However, the shock had unnerved him, I could see by his
tightly clenched hands and set lips, as he strove to control himself.

Rivers sat like a stone statue, only his eyes, desperate in their
concentration, showed the fearful mental strain he was suffering.

Zizi,--bless her!--stood behind him,--hovering, watchful,--more like a
guardian angel than a Nemesis, and with her eerie, elfin face full of
anxious suspense.

Rivers drew a long sigh; he looked round the room, appraisingly, his
quick, darting glance taking in every detail, he scanned the desk and all
the things on it, he looked through into the farther room,--the Blue
Room,--and saw the great war map hanging on the wall, and then he rose,
straightened his broad shoulders, and shook himself as one who arouses
from sleep.

Breathlessly, we who watched, saw a great light come into his eyes,--a
new self-respect, a new sense of importance showed in his whole bearing
and, with a smile of infinite tenderness he looked at Olive and said:

"I am Amory Manning!"

Zizi yelled. There is no other word for it. Her shrieks of joy filled the
room, and she danced about waving her thin little arms like a veritable
pixy.

"It's all right!" she cried, in ecstacy, "Oh, Penny, it's all right!" and
with a spring across the room, she landed in Wise's arms, who patted her
shoulder, and said:

"There, there, Ziz, don't flatten out _now_!"

Meantime, Rivers was finding himself. He stood still, with his hands
tightly grasping the chair back, and his face working as he received and
classified the memories crowding thickly back upon his burdened brain.

"Wait a minute," he said, struggling with his thoughts, "I know all about
it, but----"

"Amory!" cried Olive, "that's your _voice_! I know you _now_!"

We could all note the change in his speech. Until this moment Rivers had
spoken in the peculiar tones I had noticed the first time I met him.
Monotonous tones, almost devoid of inflection. Now, his voice was normal,
and even more melodious than the average.

Surely, the man had found himself, but if he was really Amory
Manning,--well, my mind refused to go further.

And he had also said that he killed Amos Gately!

But I felt no need of asking questions, or even of wondering, for the man
before us looked so responsible, so capable of self-explanation, that
like the rest of the assembly, I merely waited his further speech.

"There's so much to be told," he said, and his smile changed to a look of
pain. He gave another glance at Olive, and even took a step toward
her,--then he seemed to collapse, and sinking back into the chair he had
vacated, he hid his face in his hands and groaned.

"Go on!" whispered an imperious little voice, and Zizi was behind him
again, her hand on his shoulder, her tones urgent and encouraging.

"I will!" and Manning, for we felt no doubt of his identity now,--spoke
firmly and bravely. He did not look at Olive, and it was clear that this
was intentional.

Instead, he turned to Zizi, and seemed to address himself to her.

He couldn't have done better if he wanted helpful sympathy, for the black
eyes that gazed at him were soft and tender with something like a
maternal sweetness.

This mood of Zizi's, rarely shown, was one of her chiefest charms, and
Manning gratefully accepted it, and let it help him.

"Shall I tell all,--now and here?" he asked, glancing at Pennington Wise.

"Yes," said the detective, after a moment's thought. "Yes, if you will."

"Very well, then." Manning was entirely composed now, but it was evident
he was holding himself together by a strong effort. Also, he carefully
refrained from looking in Olive's direction.

This alarmed me a little, for to my mind, it argued him a guilty man,
and, that, in fact, he had declared himself to be.

Norah and I exchanged glances of understanding,--or, rather, of not
understanding,--and Manning began his story.

"I think I will begin right here," he said, in a slow, methodical way,
and with the air of one who has a disagreeable duty to perform, but who
has no intention of shirking any part of it.

"I remember everything--everything,--and it is not all pleasant
remembrance! But it must be told, and then I must go at once and report
to my superiors.

"I am Amory Manning, a special agent in the Secret Service. I was
detailed by the Government to hunt down a certain branch of the enemy spy
system in New York City, and in pursuance of my duty, I learned that Amos
Gately was the man I sought."

Manning still kept his glance averted from Olive, indeed, he looked
almost constantly at Zizi, whose dark little face, lovely in its
sympathy, seemed to drink in his every word.

"I knew all about Rodman, I was on the trail of Sadie, 'The Link,' and I
came here, that afternoon, primarily to get an incriminating paper, which
would have been positive evidence against Gately, and I had orders to
arrest him if he was unable to clear himself.

"We had a stormy interview, and I found the man was guilty of the
blackest treason. He had been a receiver of the stolen information sold
by 'The Link,' and had transmitted it, by secret channels of his own, to
the enemy government. I charged him with this, and he put up a fight. I
tried to overcome him, and take him peaceably, but he was desperate and
evaded my grasp. He ran toward that map in the other room, and I stood
just here, where I am now sitting. I had overturned the chair in our
struggle and as I suddenly saw him push aside the map and enter what was
beyond all doubt a secret mode of exit, I fired at him. Of course, I
meant merely to wing him,--merely to prevent his escape,--but as I fired
he turned and received the bullet in his heart. Of course, I didn't know
this at the time, nor did I know where he had gone. But I heard the car
descend, and knew that it must be a private elevator.

"I ran into that room, and finding the elevator entrance, behind the map,
fastened, I flew out to the hall and downstairs. In my haste, there being
no car waiting, I thought I could get down faster by the stairs. But
after running down two flights, I saw a waiting elevator and got in. I
had dropped my pistol somewhere when trying to stuff it into my overcoat
pocket as I ran downstairs. But I gave no thought to anything save
preventing the escape of my prisoner. Of course, I didn't then know how
seriously he was hurt.

"I failed to find the exit from the private elevator, and never dreaming
it was in the building next door, I hunted this building for quite a
time. I investigated the ground floor, the basement and sub-basement, but
couldn't find it. Greatly puzzled, I began the search all over again, and
then, Olive,--Miss Raynor, came, and--later, I found that others had
discovered the dead body of the man I had shot.

"I waited only to be sure of this, and then started at once to report to
the Federal Bureau."

"I know it," I interrupted, unable to keep quiet, as the recollection
surged over me, "and you went down Third Avenue on the street-car----"

"I did," Manning's face showed only an intense effort at reconstructing
the scene, "I was going to stop at my rooms on the way, for something I
needed, and----"

"Wait a minute," Wise said, "I'm interested in the Case Rivers phase of
your existence. Don't forget you're the Man Who Fell Through the Earth."

A strange smile passed over Manning's face.

"I'm just coming to that," he said; "I am that man, and I can tell you
right now, how, where, and why I made the trip!"

All eyes were upon him. This strange talk,--and he had been so sensible
up to now. Was the hallucination of falling through the earth destined to
mar his newly returned sanity?

"Go on," repeated Zizi, and the calmness of her voice restored Manning's
poise, and also raised my hopes of a plausible explanation.

"You were with me, Brice," Manning looked at me, as if for corroboration.

"Yes; I was in the car with you, but we were not near enough to speak.
There was a big crowd,--and I was standing at the rear end, while you
were well forward. But I say, Rivers, it's hard to believe that man in
the car was you! Why, you're not the same type----"

"Wait a minute," the speaker waved his hand as if to check interruption,
"I _am_ Manning,--I'll explain later,--but now I want to get that
occasion well in hand. I got off the front end of the car,--I don't know
what you did,--and as I stepped off, a sudden fierce blast of wind nearly
took me off my feet. I was right in the middle of the street but it
seemed the middle of a howling blizzard, and as I took a step,--I went
down an open manhole into the sewer.

"This I distinctly remember,--the street cleaners were working there,
shoveling the snow into the sewer. They had no business to leave the
manhole open and unguarded, but that black squall was so sudden and
terrific, no one could see or know anything for the time being.

"However, I knew perfectly well, as I fell in, what had happened, but
then,--and I remember this, too,--I fell and fell,--down, down,--it
seemed for miles; I was whirled dizzily about,--but still I fell--on and
on,--interminably. I felt my consciousness going,--at first, abnormally
acute, my senses became dulled, and I had only a sensation of
falling--ever falling--through the earth!

"There my memory ceases. And as I next remember finding myself in a bed
in Bellevue Hospital, and as I have had detailed to me the full account
of my being found floating, nearly dead, in the East River, I can only
accept the inevitable conclusion that I was carried by the rush of the
sewer, straight out to the river, and picked up for dead.

"That a sign of life was found, after I was taken to the morgue, was of
the nature of a miracle, and only the most desperate efforts fanned that
little spark into resuscitation. The rest you know. The shock, the
exposure, the cold, and perhaps a blow or two on my head, all combined,
resulted in a total loss of memory as to my identity or to the events of
my former life.

"I had only remaining the positive recollection of that fall--" Manning
shuddered,--"that interminable, that never-ending fall through the
earth."

"But you fell through water," said Wise, his eyes staring at the narrator
of all this.

"Not to my knowledge. My realization of falling only lasted until I
struck the water in the sewer. That, doubtless, knocked me out for good
and all,--mentally, I mean. I have to thank my wonderful vitality and
strong constitution for the fact that I really lived through the
catastrophe. Think what it means! Hurtled through that rushing torrent of
a sewer half filled with melted snow and water,--flung out into the
river, dashed about among the floating cakes of ice, and all with
sufficient force to tear off my clothing,--and yet to live through it!"

"Going some!" cried Zizi, and the sparkle of her dancing eyes and the
delight on her small, smiling face, made the rude phrase seem quite fit
for the occasion.

"And so," Manning went on, quietly, "I have accomplished my quests. I
have been working hard to discover three things,--my own identity, the
whereabouts of Amory Manning, and--the slayer of Amos Gately. I, myself,
am the answer to all three questions."

A silence fell; and then Olive spoke.

"You are no slayer,--you are no murderer. You shot Mr. Gately by
accident, in the pursuance of your duty. You are not only exonerated, but
you did a deed, in freeing the world of a traitor, that entitles you to a
Distinguished Service Cross! I respected my guardian,--I was fond of
him,--but now I know what he was. I have only contempt and hatred of him!
You, Amory, are a hero!--my hero."

Olive held out her hands with a beautiful gesture of affection, and
Manning strode across the room to her side.

"Now I have the only forgiveness I care for," he said, and his face was
radiant. "Now, I must go at once, and report. My duty lies to my
country,--to my government! Oh, there are so many things yet to think of!
They,--the Government,--offered a reward for me!"

"Which you have won yourself!" exclaimed Penny Wise.

"Yes," chuckled Zizi, "and you've won the reward offered for Mr.
Gately's--" she hesitated,--"for the man who freed the world of one more
traitorous viper!"

"And, incidentally," I added, "you've cleared up the puzzle of the man
who fell through the earth!"

"It is well that Gately is no more," Manning said, musingly; "he was
especially dangerous because he was in such a high position and so
trusted by everybody. Rodman was an equal scoundrel, but he worked
inconspicuously. Gately banked on his reputation for honor and
probity,--used his own well-earned fame to further the meanest cause on
earth!

"Whatever happens, I'm glad he is unable to do further harm. I didn't
mean to kill him--it was an accident,--but the world is well rid of him."

"Amen," said Olive, softly.

"Well, the end justifies the means," said Mrs. Vail, a little
hysterically. "Why, once I heard of----"

Ruthlessly, I shut her off.

"Accept my greetings, Mr. Manning," I said, offering my hand to our
new-found friend. "I'm proud to know you!"

And then there was a scene of handshaking and smiling welcome such as any
hero might be proud to receive.

"Wait a minute," Manning said, at last, "that day, I was hunting a paper,
you know. If it was sent off, there will yet be trouble from it. Has it
been found, do you know, Mr. Wise?"

"No; what sort of a paper?"

"One of the stolen telegrams. It was concealed, I had reason to think,
somewhere in Gately's desk----"

"Do you know that?"

"I think so--wait,--I had just thought I knew where to look for it, when
Gately said something that made me telephone for assistance in his
arrest. I was waiting for an answer to my call----"

"When you drew the snow crystal!" Zizi cried.

"Yes," he smiled. "And then, I saw something that hinted a possible
hiding-place--ah, here it is!"

He stepped to the desk and picked up the heavy, ornate gold penholder. He
fussed with it a moment, and then, unscrewing it in the middle, showed
that it was a cleverly constructed place to hide a tiny roll of thin
paper.

There was such a roll in it, and pulling it out, Manning grinned with
glee. "All right," he cried, joyfully; "this is the paper, a Government
secret! See, you read it by that carriage-call check, and it's safe now!"

It was a paper filled with rows of letters, such a paper as had been
found in Sadie's possession and also in Rodman's.

"Now, I am satisfied," Manning declared; "and now I must go straight down
to the Federal Bureau. But first----"

"Sure!" said Zizi, reading his thoughts; "we're excused!"

And with a saucy smile, she flew over and kissed Olive heartily. Then,
with an imperious air, she took command, and almost before we knew it she
had herded every last one of us, except Olive and Manning, across the
hall to my office.

I was the last to go, and Manning smiled broadly as he called after me,
"I want Miss Raynor to say once more that she exonerates me, and then
I'll report to my other Superior!"

Laughing happily, I entered my office, and found it a scene of hilarious
gayety. Mrs. Vail was positively cavorting about, as Norah waltzed her up
and down the room; Pennington Wise was sitting on the corner of my desk
whistling dance music for them, and Zizi, her arms waving, executed a
sort of glory dance of her own making-up.

After a time, the door of the Gately room opened, and Olive's blushing
face appeared, followed by that of the Man Who Fell Through the Earth.

"I want to correct a misstatement of mine," she said; "I told you I
wasn't engaged to Amory Manning--but,--I am!"

The two came over to my office, and the ovation we gave them was second
only to our reception of Manning himself a few moments before.

"Are you _sure_ it is Manning?" Wise teased her.

"Yes," said Olive, most seriously. "You see he was in disguise when he
was himself, and so----"

Her voice was lost in the shout that went up at her remark, and she
looked around in bewilderment.

"She's right," said Manning, smiling; "I was. You see, when I became a
Secret Service man, I had certain peculiar duties assigned me and it was
important that I shouldn't be known. So I adopted a permanent
disguise,--oh, nothing much,--merely a mild dye for my hair and beard,
which washed off easily, and a pair of big, horn-rimmed specs, which were
really rather becoming than otherwise. But Olive, and many of my
acquaintances knew me only in this way. I wore a Vandyke beard, and a
small mustache of the Charles I type.

"Then you see, when I was taken in at the hospital, and shaved, I
continued to adopt a clean-shaven face. Also, the dye was thoroughly
washed out in the sewer, and as my memory was washed out with it, I
experienced no surprise at finding a light-haired man in my mirror.

"Olive tells me, too, that my voice was of a totally different caliber,
due, no doubt, to a certain vacuity made in my brain by the loss of my
memory. Oh, well, that's the story. And but for my peculiarity of drawing
snow crystals,--a thing I've done just about all my life,--and but for
Zizi's quick-witted realization of this habit of mine, I might never have
regained consciousness of my true personality!"

"Probably something else would have brought it about," said Wise, "but
your drawing of the snow crystals began with Brice's first interview with
you. I ought to have found that drawing on Gately's desk long ago!
Stoo-pid!" and he beat his head in mock self-abasement.

"Yes," said Zizi, giving Wise a smile that was both impudent and
affectionate, "you should have, oh, Wise Guy! You ought to have found
that snowflake drawing for yourself."

"Oh, that's what I have you for, Ziz, to look up clews for me."

"Of course you do, Penny Wise. I'm only your Pound Foolish, but at least,
I can see through a clew that is as clear as crystal!"




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

Obvious typographical errors were corrected.

Non-standard spellings and dialect were not changed.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO FELL THROUGH THE EARTH***


******* This file should be named 44872-8.txt or 44872-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/4/8/7/44872



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
